INTRODUCTION

In the annals of investing, Warren Bu ett stands alone. Starting
from scratch, simply by picking stocks and companies for
investment, Bu ett amassed one of the epochal fortunes of the
twentieth century. Over a period of four decades—more than
enough to iron out the e ects of fortuitous rolls of the dice—Bu ett
outperformed the stock market, by a stunning margin and without
taking undue risks or su ering a single losing year. This is a feat
that market savants, Main Street brokers, and academic scholars
had long proclaimed to be impossible. By virtue of this steady,
superior compounding, Bu ett acquired a magical-seeming net
worth of $15 billion, and counting.
Bu ett did this in markets bullish and bearish and through
economies fat and lean, from the Eisenhower years to Bill Clinton,
from the 1950s to the 1990s, from saddle shoes and Vietnam to
junk bonds and the information age. Over the broad sweep of
postwar America, as the major stock averages advanced by 11
percent or so a year, Bu ett racked up a compounded annual gain
of 29.2 percent.1

The uniqueness of this achievement is more signi cant in that it
was the fruit of old-fashioned, long-term investing. Wall Street’s
modern nanciers got rich by exploiting their control of the
public’s money: their essential trick was to take in—and sell out—
the public at opportune moments. Bu ett shunned this game, as
well as the more venal excesses for which Wall Street is deservedly
famous. In e ect, he rediscovered the art of pure capitalism—a
cold-blooded sport, but a fair one.
The public shareholders who invested with Bu ett also got rich,
and in exactly the same proportion to their capital that Bu ett did.
The numbers themselves are almost inconceivable. If one had
invested $10,000 when Bu ett began his career, working out of his
study in Omaha in 1956, and had stuck with him throughout, one
would have had an investment at the end of 1995 worth $125
million.2
And yet, the numbers alone do not account for the aura that
Bu ett cast on Wall Street. Once a year, disciples and money men
would ock to Omaha like pilgrims on a hajj, to hear Bu ett
deconstruct the intricacies of investing, business, and nance. His
annual meetings became a piece of Americana, like an Elvis
concert or a religious revival. Financial groupies arrived in Omaha
clutching Bu ett’s writings like a Bible and reciting his aphorisms
like excerpts from the Sermon on the Mount.
His grasp of simple verities gave rise to a drama that would
recur throughout his life. Long before those pilgrimages to Omaha,
long before Bu ett had a record, he would stand in a corner at
college parties, baby-faced and bright-eyed, holding forth on the
universe as a dozen or two of his older, drunken fraternity brothers
crowded around. A few years later, when these friends had
metamorphosed into young associates starting out on Wall Street,
the ritual was the same. Bu ett, the youngest of the group, would
plop himself in a big, broad club chair and expound on nance
while the others sat at his feet.
On Wall Street, his homespun manner made him a cult gure.
Where nance was so forbiddingly complex, Bu ett could explain
it like a general-store clerk discussing the weather. He never forgot

that underneath each stock and bond, no matter how arcane, there
lay a tangible, ordinary business. Beneath the jargon of Wall
Street, he seemed to unearth a street from small-town America.
It is a curious irony that as more Americans acquired an interest
in investing, Wall Street became more complex, more abstruse,
more arcane, and more forbidding than ever. When Bu ett was
born, in the midst of the Depression, the few Americans who did
have capital felt personally equipped to manage it. This they did
by salting it away in blue chips and triple-A bonds. The Depression
cast a long shadow, but the postwar prosperity eclipsed it. Today,
tens of millions have at least a small grubstake, but very few feel
comfortable with handling it, and fewer still have the old habit of
prudence. At best, they anxiously scan the nancial pages, as
though each day’s twitch in the data on housing or in ation might
bring the long-awaited “answer.” At worst, they switch in and out
of mutual funds with an impatience that would have shocked their
grandparents.
In such a complex age, what was stunning about Bu ett was his
applicability. Most of what Bu ett did was imitable by the average
person (this is why the multitudes ocked to Omaha). Bu ett’s
genius was largely a genius of character—of patience, discipline,
and rationality. These were common enough virtues, but they were
rare in the heat of nancial passions, and indispensable to anyone
who would test his mettle in the stock market. In this sense,
Bu ett’s character and career unfolded as a sort of public tutorial
on investing and on American business. Bu ett was aware of his
role from the very beginning, and he nurtured a curious habit of
chronicling his escapades even as he lived them.
As an investor, Bu ett eschewed the use of leverage, futures,
dynamic hedging, modern portfolio analysis, and all of the esoteric
strategies developed by academics. Unlike the modern portfolio
manager, whose mind-set is that of a trader, Bu ett risked his
capital on the long-term growth of a few select businesses. In this,
he resembled the magnates of a previous age, such as J. P.
Morgan, Sr.

But the secretive Morgan was a Wall Street archetype; Bu ett, a
plainspoken Midwesterner, was its antithesis. He was famous for
quipping that it was the bankers “who should have been wearing
the ski masks,”3 or that, as he said to a friend who had been
o ered a job in nance, “you won’t encounter much tra c taking
the high road in Wall Street.”4 He once wrote that he would no
more take an investment banker’s opinion on whether to do a deal
than he would ask a barber whether he needed a haircut.5 This
commonsensical cracker-barrel wit made him an archetype of
something larger, and far more basic, to the country’s past. It
answered to a deeply American need for authentic heroes.
This has always been America’s secular myth: the uncorrupted
commoner from the Midwest or West who stands up to the venal
Easterners, be they politicians, bankers, big businessmen, or other.
It is a ransom to the country’s origins, a remembrance that the rst
authentic and pure Americans were destroyed. Let Europe have its
princes; the American ideal has always been a self-made man from
the midcountry—a Lincoln, a Twain, a Will Rogers. In an age
without heroes, this, too, is what Bu ett’s disciples were seeking in
Omaha.
As Jack New eld wrote of Robert Kennedy, Bu ett was not a
hero, only a hope; not a myth, only a man.6 Despite his broad wit,
he was strangely stunted. When he went to Paris, his only reaction
was that he had no interest in sight-seeing and that the food was
better in Omaha. His talent sprang from his unrivaled
independence of mind and ability to focus on his work and shut
out the world, yet those same qualities exacted a toll. Once, when
Bu ett was visiting the publisher Katharine Graham on Martha’s
Vineyard, a friend remarked on the beauty of the sunset. Bu ett
replied that he hadn’t focused on it, as though it were necessary for
him to exert a deliberate act of concentration to “focus” on a
sunset.7 Even at his California beachfront vacation home, Bu ett
would work every day for weeks and not go near the water.
Like other prodigies, he paid a price. Having been raised in a
home with more than its share of demons, he lived within an
emotional fortress. The few people who shared his o ce had no

knowledge of the inner man, even after decades. Even his children
could scarcely recall a time when he broke through his surface calm
and showed some feeling.
Though part of him is a showman or preacher, he is essentially a
private person. Peter Lynch, the mutual-fund wizard, visited
Bu ett in the 1980s and was struck by the tranquillity in his inner
sanctum. His archives, neatly alphabetized in metal ling cabinets,
looked as les had in another era. He had no armies of traders, no
rows of electronic screens, as Lynch did. Bu ett had no price
charts, no computer—only a newspaper clipping from 1929 and an
antique ticker under a glass dome. The two of them paced the
oor, recounting their storied histories, what they had bought,
what they had sold. Where Lynch had kicked out his losers every
few weeks, Bu ett had owned mostly the same few stocks for years
and years. Lynch felt a pang, as though he had traveled back in
time.8
Bu ett’s one concession to modernity is a private jet. Otherwise,
he derives little pleasure from spending his fabulous wealth. He
has no art collection or snazzy car, and he has never lost his taste
for hamburgers. He lives in a commonplace house on a tree-lined
block, on the same street where he works. His consuming passion
—and pleasure—is his work, or, as he calls it, his canvas. It is there
that he revealed the secrets of his trade, and left a self-portrait.

Chapter 1

OMAHA

Like a diamond set in emerald, gracing the west bank of the Missouri
River, lies Omaha, the wonder city of the West and marvel of enterprise,
ability, and progressiveness.
TELEPHONE COMPANY PROMOTION , 1900

Almost from the day that Dr. Pollard awakened him to the world,
six pounds strong and ve weeks early, Warren Bu ett had a thirst
for numbers. As a boy, he and his friend Bob Russell would pass an
afternoon on the Russells’ front porch, which overlooked a busy
intersection, recording the license-plate numbers of passing cars.
When the sky darkened, they would go inside and spread open the
Omaha World-Herald, counting how often each letter appeared and
lling entire scrapbooks with progressions of numbers, as though
they held the key to some Euclidean riddle. Often, Russell would
reach for the almanac and read out a list of cities. One by one,
Warren would spit back the populations. “I’d say a city, he’d hit it
on the nose,” Russell would recall, half a century later. “I might
say, ‘Davenport, Iowa; Topeka, Kansas; Akron, Ohio.’ If I gave him
ten cities, he’d hit every one.” Baseball scores, horse-racing odds—
every numeral was fodder for that precocious memory. Combed,

scrubbed, and stu ed into a pew of Dundee Presbyterian Church,
Warren would pass the time on Sundays calculating the life spans
of ecclesiastical composers. He would stand in the living room with
a paddle and ball, counting, counting by the hour. He would play
Monopoly for what seemed forever—counting his imagined riches.
Blue-eyed, with a fair complexion and pink cheeks, Warren was
intrigued not merely with numbers, but with money. His rst
possession was a nickel-coated money changer, given to him by his
Aunt Alice at Christmas and thereafter proudly strapped to his belt.
When he was ve, he set up a gum stand on his family’s sidewalk
and sold Chiclets to passersby. After that, he sold lemonade—not
on the Bu etts’ quiet street, but in front of the Russells’ house,
where the tra c was heavier.
At nine, Warren and “Russ” would count the bottle caps from the
soda machine at the gas station across from the Russells’ house.
This was not idle counting, but a primitive market survey. How
many Orange Crush caps? How many Cokes and root beers? The
boys would cart the caps in a wagon and store them in Warren’s
basement, piles of them. The idea was, which brand had the highest
sales? Which was the best business?
At an age when few children knew what a business was, Warren
would get rolls of ticker tape from his stockbroker father, set them
on the oor, and decipher the ticker symbols from his father’s
Standard & Poor’s. He would search the local golf course for used
but marketable golf balls. He would go to Ak-Sar-Ben * racetrack
and scour the saw-dusted oors, turning over torn and discarded
stubs and often nding a winning ticket that had been erroneously
thrown away. In the sweltering Nebraska summers, Warren and
Russ would carry golf clubs for the rich gentlemen at the Omaha
Country Club and earn $3 for the day. And at dusk, as they rocked
on the Russells’ front-porch glider in the stillness of the Midwestern
twilight, the parade of Nashes and Stude-bakers and the clanging
of the trolley car would put a thought in Warren’s mind. All of that
tra c with no place to go but right by the Russells’ house, he
would say—if only there were a way to make some money o it.
Russell’s mom, Evelyn, recalled Warren after fty years. “All that

tra c,” he would say to her. “What a shame you aren’t making
money from the people going by.” As if the Russells could set up a
toll booth on North 52nd Street. “What a shame, Mrs. Russell.”
What, then, was the source?
Warren was the second of three children, and the only son. His
mother was a petite, feisty woman from a small town in Nebraska.
She had a lively temperament and, as was said of women relegated
to a supporting role, “a good head for numbers.” Warren’s father,
a serious but kind man, was surely the dominant in uence in his
life. Opening to Warren’s eyes the world of stocks and bonds, he
must have planted a seed, but insofar as such things are knowable,
Howard Bu ett’s acumen for numbers was not on a par with his
son’s. Nor was his passion for making money. What was it, then,
that prompted Warren to turn from that mannered, comfortable
household—to crawl along the oor of the racetrack as though it
were a bed of pearl oysters? What was it that would enable him,
years later, to stun his colleagues in business-time and again—by
computing columns of gures in his head, and by recalling
encyclopedic volumes of data as easily as he had the population of
Akron? Warren’s younger sister, Roberta, said atly, “I think it was
in his genes.”
The Bu etts were said to be gentle and sweet-natured, traits that
endured. They were skilled at business and loath to spend a dollar.
The earliest known Bu ett (pronounced Bu ett) in America, John
Bu ett, was a serge weaver of French Huguenot origin. He married
Hannah Titus, in Huntington, on the north shore of Long Island, in
1696.1 The Bu etts remained on Long Island, as farmers, until
after the Civil War. But they had a streak of ambition, which
clashed with the family’s frugal ways. In 1867, Sidney Homan
Bu ett was employed at clearing land for Zebulon Bu ett, his
grandfather. On hearing of his fty-cent-per-diem wage, Sidney
became so disgusted that he put down his ax and headed west. He
took a job driving a stage out of Omaha, and in 1869 opened the S.
H. Bu ett grocery. With Omaha still in its frontier beginnings, the

Bu etts were ensconced in the city’s commercial life, a mile and a
half from the wooded site of the future o ce of America’s richest
man.
Omaha was a cluster of frame and log buildings, set against the
rugged blu s rising from the Missouri River. Though the plains
stood at its door, the town itself was hilly. The area had been
wilderness until 1854, when a treaty with the Maha Indians (later
the Omahas) opened the Nebraska Territory to settlement. The
seminal moment in its growth was in 1859, when an Illinois
railroad lawyer named Abraham Lincoln visited the area and took
a parcel of land as collateral for a defaulted loan. A few years
later, President Lincoln designated the city as the eastern terminal
of the Union Paci c Railroad.2
Sidney Bu ett opened his store, with impeccable timing, three
months after the railroads joined the continent. Omaha was
already “the great jumping-o place” for engines belching across
the plains.3 It soon was teeming with settlers, drifters, speculators,
Civil War veterans, railroad men, ex-convicts, and prostitutes,
many of whom happened upon the Bu ett grocery, where Sidney
sold quail, wild ducks, and prairie chickens over the counter.
Zebulon was highly dubious of his prospects. Writing to his twentyone-year-old grandson, Zebulon stressed that prudence in business
was the Bu etts’ watchword.
You can’t expect to make much, but I hope business will get better in the spring. But
if you can’t make it, do leave o
that is better than money.4

in time to pay your debts and save your credit, for

But the young city prospered, and Sidney prospered with it. By
the 1870s, Omaha had cast-iron architecture and an opera house.
By the turn of the century, it had skyscrapers, cable cars, and a
swelling population of 140,000. Sidney built a bigger store and
brought two sons into the business. The younger of these, Ernest—
the future grandfather of Warren—had the family knack for
business. He quarreled with his brother over a girl, and married
her, whereupon the brothers stopped speaking. In 1915, Ernest left

the downtown store and established a new one—Bu ett & Son—in
the city’s western reaches.
Once again, the Bu ett timing was shrewd. Omaha’s population
was migrating west from the river. Sensing opportunity in the
suburbs, Ernest cultivated a delivery trade and sold on credit.
Soon, rich families’ cooks were phoning orders to Bu ett & Son.
The business grew, and Ernest hewed to the Bu etts’ tight sted
ways. He paid the stock clerks the lordly sum of $2 for an elevenhour shift, accompanied by a lecture on the evils of the minimum
wage and similar “socialistic” mandates. Tall and imposing, Ernest
did not merely run the store—he tyrannized it.
Ernest’s son Howard—Warren’s father—had no interest in
becoming a third-generation grocer. Howard was independentminded, like Ernest, but warmer and without the bluster. He
worked brie y on an oil pipeline in Wyoming, but his true
interests were in the life of the mind. At the University of Nebraska
in Lincoln, Howard was editor of the Daily Nebraskan, and aspired
to a career in journalism. Though not particularly handsome, he
had dark hair and an arresting gaze. As fraternity president, he
had his pick of society belles. But in his senior year, Howard met a
hardscrabble country girl who was anything but society.
Leila Stahl had grown up in West Point, Nebraska, a bleak, rural
town of 2,200 people. Her father, John Ammon Stahl, owned a
weekly paper, the Cuming County Democrat. Most of the people in
town were Germanic, and the English-speaking Stahls were
outsiders. Leila’s mother felt particularly isolated and spent much
of the time bedridden and depressed. Leila and her brother and
two sisters had to fend for themselves, and Leila had to help her
father at the County Democrat. From the fth grade on, she would
sit on a high stool and set type by hand, and later by Linotype.
Sometimes when a train stopped in West Point she would rush on
board and interview passengers to ll the news columns. On
Thursdays, this slight schoolgirl stood beside the y of the giant
press, rmly gripping the sheets of newsprint and taking care to
pull each one at just the right moment. In time, Leila developed

pounding headaches, synchronized with the press run of the County
Democrat.
After Leila graduated from high school, at sixteen, she had to
work three more years to a ord tuition at Lincoln. She appeared in
Howard Bu ett’s o ce, looking for a job at the Daily Nebraskan,
having survived her childhood with a tart tongue and a wry sense
of humor. She was pretty, just over ve feet, with soft features and
wavy light brown hair. As she would put it, she “majored in
marrying”5—not an unreasonable course of study for a woman
facing the prospect of returning to West Point.
Howard hired her, and immediately asked her for a date. The
attraction was immediate on both sides. When his graduation
neared, Howard asked for her hand. John Stahl, an educated man,
had hoped that his daughter would nish college, but gave his
blessing. The wedding was in West Point, the day after Christmas,
1925, in ten-below-zero weather. According to a memoir that Leila
wrote for her grandchildren, Howard later told her, “When I
married you it was the best bargain I ever made.” There was no
thought of a honeymoon. Directly the wedding ended, they
boarded a bus for Omaha.
Howard had been o ered a newspaper job, the stu of his
dreams, but a friend of his father’s had a $25-a-week spot for him
in an insurance company. Howard’s capitulation was a
commentary on the times. As Leila noted, “He deferred to his
father, who had paid for college.”6
The couple moved into a two-bedroom white clapboard
bungalow with a coal furnace, on Barker Avenue. For Leila, it was
a hard beginning. Raised by an invalid mother, she was
unprepared as a home-maker. As Howard used the car, Leila
walked to the streetcar when she took temporary secretarial or
printing jobs—sometimes, in those rst years, making more in a
week than he did. Then she would walk back to a load of
housework. In 1927, Leila had an eye operation, after which her
headaches began to recur. The next year, when Doris, her rst
child, was born, Leila ran a fever of 105, alarming everyone. Two
years later the couple had a son, Warren Edward. It was a humid

summer’s day—August 30, 1930—a cloudburst breaking the eightynine-degree heat.
From the start, Warren was cautious beyond his years. When he
learned to walk, it was with his knees bent, as if ensuring that he
wouldn’t have far to fall. When his mother took Doris and Warren
to church-circle meetings, Doris would explore and get lost, but
Warren would sit dutifully by her. “Never much trouble as a little
child,” Leila would write.
In a picture taken when Warren was two, he appears as a
chunky, blondish boy in white laced boots and white socks, one
hand grasping a cube-shaped block, with a slight smile and a deep
gaze. His hair, reddish blond at rst, turned to auburn, but his
temperament didn’t change. He didn’t wander where he was
unfamiliar, nor did he cause trouble or get into ghts. Roberta,
younger than Warren by three years, would protect him from
neighborhood bullies. Once, Howard brought home some boxing
gloves and invited a boy over to box with Warren. “They were
never used afterwards,” Leila noted. So gentle was Warren’s nature
that he inspired in his sisters, as he would in others, a protective
instinct. He didn’t seem equipped to ght.
Warren’s rst years were di cult ones for the family. Howard
was working as a securities salesman with Union Street Bank. The
curmudgeonly Ernest thought it a dubious profession. He summed
it up in a letter to Warren’s Uncle Clarence:
I know all there is to know about stocks, and in a few words that means that any man
who has been able to save a few dollars up to the time he is fty years old is a darn
fool to play the stock market, and I don’t mean maybe.7

Howard scribbled in the margin, “A real booster for my business!”
But within a year, Ernest looked prophetic. On August 13, 1931—
two weeks shy of Warren’s rst birthday—his father returned from
work with the news that his bank had closed. It was the de ning,
faith-shattering scene of the Great Depression. His job was gone,
his savings were lost.8 Ernest gave his son a little time to pay the
grocery bills—a bitter pill, for Howard had inherited the Bu ett

disdain for borrowing. “Save your credit, for that is better than
money.” His prospects were so bleak that he considered moving the
family back to West Point.
But in short order, Howard announced that Bu ett, Sklenicka &
Co. had opened its doors in the Union State Bank building on
Farnam Street—the same street where Warren would later live and
work. Howard and a partner, George Sklenicka, peddled
“Investment Securities, Municipal, Corporation and Public Utilities,
Stocks and Bonds.” Howard now drew on his courage and will, for
the market crash had tarnished the public’s trust. Omaha, at rst,
had thought itself immune to the Depression, but by 1932, wheat
prices had plunged and farmers were eating in soup kitchens.
Staunchly Republican Omaha voted Roosevelt in a landslide; the
next year, eleven thousand registered for relief. Born in those
meanest of times, Bu ett Sklenicka appears at rst to have been a
business only in name—a place where Howard could hang his hat
and work on commission. His rst sales were long in coming, and
the commissions were small. Ernest, who was president of the
Omaha Rotary, informed his fellow Rotarians that as his wellintentioned son didn’t know much about stocks, they would be
advised not to give him their business.9 Leila managed to put
dinner on the table, but she often skipped herself to give Howard a
full portion. The family was so strapped that Leila stopped going
to her church circle for want of twenty-nine cents to buy a pound
of co ee.
And the Bu etts were wracked by those extremes of nature that
in the Midwest seemed as if fused with the Depression itself. “The
Great Depression began,” Leila wrote, with “a terrible, 112-degree
heat.” Dust storms blew in from Oklahoma, and Omahans vainly
sealed their homes against the locusts. On the day of Warren’s
fourth birthday party, a “high searing wind” blew the paper plates
and napkins o the table and buried the porch in red dust. Warren
and Doris would bear the su ocating heat outside, waiting for the
ice man to hop from his horse-drawn cart and hand them ice slivers
to suck on. Worse than the heat was the bitter winter cold. Bundled
up, Warren and his sister would walk eight long blocks to the

Columbian School, in weather so frigid that salesmen kept their
motors running as they paid their calls, for fear that they wouldn’t
be able to restart their engines.
By the time that Warren began school, his father’s fortunes were
rapidly improving. When Warren was six, the Bu etts moved to a
more spacious Tudor brick home with a sloping, shingled roof, on
suburban North 53rd Street. The bad times in the Bu ett home
were not discussed; they were banished.
But they seem to have deeply a ected Warren. He emerged from
those rst hard years with an absolute drive to become very, very
rich. He thought about it before he was ve years old. And from
that time on, he scarcely stopped thinking of it.
When Warren was six, the Bu etts took a rare vacation to Lake
Okoboji, in northern Iowa, where they rented a cabin. Warren
managed to buy a six-pack of Cokes for twenty- ve cents; then he
waddled around the lake selling the sodas at ve cents each, for a
nickel pro t. Back in Omaha, he bought soda pop from his
grandfather’s grocery and sold it door-to-door on summer nights
while other children played in the street.
From then on, such endeavors were unceasing. And Warren’s
moneymaking had a purpose. He wasn’t thinking about getting
pocket money for then, but about advancing toward his great
aspiration.
When Warren was seven, he was hospitalized with a mysterious
fever. Doctors removed his appendix, but he remained so ill that
the doctors feared he would die. Even when his father fetched his
favorite noodle soup, Warren refused to eat. But left alone, he took
a pencil and lled a page with numbers. These, he told his nurse,
represented his future capital. “I don’t have much money now,”
Warren said cheerfully, “but someday I will and I’ll have my
picture in the paper.”10 Purportedly in his death throes, Warren
sought succor not in soup but in dreams of money.
Howard Bu ett was determined that Warren would never repeat
his own experience of hardship. Also, he resolved that as a parent,
he would never follow the example of Ernest and demean his son.
He unfailingly expressed con dence in Warren and supported him

in whatever he did. And though Warren had his mother’s high
spirits, his universe revolved around his father.
Six feet tall, Howard towered over the family, physically and in
other respects. He worked hard at supporting the family, owning
not only his brokerage but also the South Omaha Feed Co., a small
business by Omaha’s stockyards. But he was not excited by money;
his passions were religion and politics. He was a self-consciously
moral man and had the courage of his beliefs, which were
conservative in the extreme. (“To the right of God,” a local banker
said.)
Convinced that Roosevelt was destroying the dollar, Howard
gave gold coins to his children and bought pretty things for the
house—a crystal chandelier, sterling silver atware, and oriental
throw rugs—all with a view that tangibles were better than
dollars. He even stocked up on canned foods and purchased a
farm, intended to be the family’s refuge from the hell re of
in ation.
Howard also stressed a principle that was more enduring than
any of his political opinions, namely, the habit of independent
thought. With his children at his side, Howard would recite a
favorite maxim from Emerson:
The great man is he who in the midst of the crowd keeps with perfect sweetness the
independence of solitude.

Howard drilled the children in religious values, but also in
secular ones. He taught an adult Sunday school class, but he also
served on the public school board. Scarcely a week went by
without his reminding Warren and his sisters of their duty—not
just to God, but to community. He was fond of telling them, “You
are not required to carry the whole burden—nor are you permitted
to put down your share.”
As was not, perhaps, so uncommon for a man of that era, he not
only mouthed such aphorisms but did his best to live by them. He
did not ever drink or smoke. When a favored customer’s securities

turned out poorly, Howard felt bad enough to repurchase them for
his own account.
“You are a good citizen,” he would respond when told of some
social malady. “What are you going to do about it?”
He sat, always, in a red leather chair in the living room, with a
Victrola at his ear blaring out Stephen Foster and cherished hymns
and marches. A creature of habit, the dimpled stockbroker would
take the family to Sunday dinner at the bustling terra-cotta Union
Station, and then to Evans Ice Cream on Center Street. Though he
dressed soberly in dark suits, he smiled easily. Herbert Davis, at
one time Howard’s associate, said, “He was exactly what you’d
want in a father.”
His children lived in fear of disappointing him. Doris refused to
even sit with friends who were drinking beer, lest her father see
them and associate her with such sinfulness. “He had all these high
principles,” Roberta recalled. “You felt you had to be a good
person.”
Warren idealized him the most of all. He was close to his dad,
and loose and easy with him. In church, once, Warren told his
rather o -key father, “Pops, either you can sing or I can sing, but
we both can’t sing at the same time.” Howard a ectionately called
him “Fireball.”
When Warren was ten, Howard took him to New York—as he
did, in turn, each of his children—on the overnight train. Leila
watched Warren go o with his “best friend” in hand and his big
stamp album under his arm. Their itinerary included a baseball
game, a stamp display, and “some place with Lionel toy trains.”11
On Wall Street, Warren went to the stock exchange.
Warren was already as fascinated by stocks as other boys were
by model aircraft. He frequently visited Howard’s now prosperous
brokerage, which had moved to the marble-columned Omaha
National Bank Building, at 17th and Farnam. Up in his father’s
o ce, Warren would gaze at the stock and bond certi cates,
stowed behind gold-painted bars and endowed, in Warren’s eyes,
with a mysterious allure.12 Often, he would race down the steps to
the Harris Upham brokerage, which was in the same building and

was frequented by nancial men in Omaha as a source of stock
quotations. Jesse Livermore, the infamous East Coast speculator,
would stop by when he was in town, scribble an order on a piece
of paper, and silently depart. And the Harris Upham brokers
indulged the young, big-eared Warren by allowing him to chalk the
prices of stocks on the blackboard.13
At home, Warren began to chart the prices of stocks on his own.
Observing their ups and downs, he was bewitched by the idea of
deciphering their patterns. At eleven, he took the plunge and
bought three shares of Cities Service preferred, as well as three
shares for his sister Doris, at $38 a share. “I knew then he knew
what he was doing,” Doris would recall. “The boy lived and
breathed numbers.” But Cities Service plunged to 27. They sweated
it out, and the stock recovered to 40, whereupon Warren sold,
netting, after commission, his rst $5 of pro t in the market.
Directly he sold, Cities Service climbed to 200. It was his rst
lesson in patience.
Warren did better at the track. Intrigued by the mathematics of
odds-making, he and Russell developed a tipping system for horse
players. After a few days, they noticed that the system worked, so
they penciled out their picks under the banner Stable-Boy Selections
and took a pile of copies to Ak-Sar-Ben racetrack. Quoting Russell:
“We found out we could sell it. We were waving them around,
calling ‘Get your Stable-Boy Selections.’ But we didn’t have a license
and they shut us down.”14
Warren’s exploits were always based on numbers, which he
trusted above all else. In contrast, he did not subscribe to his
family’s religion. Even at a young age, he was too mathematical,
and too logical, to make the leap of faith. He adopted his father’s
ethical underpinnings, but not his belief in an unseen divinity. In a
person who is honest in his thoughts, and especially in a boy, such
untempered logic can only lead to one terrifying fear—the fear of
dying. And Warren was stricken with it.15
Every week, no matter if the snows were four feet high, Leila
and Howard insisted that Warren go to Sunday school. But it didn’t
sustain him. When he sat in church, calculating the life spans of the

ecclesiastics, there was a purpose to it. He wanted to know
whether faith would result in living a longer life.16 Not faith in an
afterlife, as a believer would have had, but a concern for living
longer in this one.
He and Bob Russell would be sitting on the Russells’ front-porch
glider, in the stillness of an afternoon, and as if brought on by a
sudden prairie twister, Warren would say, “Russ, there is one thing
I am scared of. I am afraid to die.” He brought it up maybe every
year or so—often enough so that it stuck in Russell’s mind. It
seemed disconnected from everything else that Russell knew of
Warren, who was usually so buoyant. Sometimes Russell would put
birdseed on the oor of the milk box and trap a bird inside and
invariably, Warren would beg him not to harm it. Russell would
pull a string, tied to the door of the milk box, and let it go. But he
couldn’t release Warren from the fear of his own mortality.
“If you do what God gave you the talent to do, you can be
successful and help others and die with a smile,” Russell would say.
“Bob, I’m just scared,” Warren would reply.
Russell, a Roman Catholic, did not understand. He would wonder
where it came from, why a guy who had so much going for him
was so afraid. But there was an aspect of Warren’s life at home
that Russell did not know about.
To outside appearances, the Bu ett household was the ideal:
loving, prosperous, inspired by high morals, and centered on the
family. And such particulars were genuine. Leila would refer to the
day she met Howard as “the luckiest day of my life.”
She treated her husband like a king—a benevolent king, but a
king nonetheless. A practical woman, Leila had ideas of her own
about stocks, but she didn’t mention them to Howard. Even when
Leila had pounding headaches, she was careful not to bother
Howard or disturb his reading. Her aim was to be a perfect wife.
Warren’s friends knew her as a tiny, cheerful woman with a pretty
smile—sweet and sociable and all atwitter, like the good witch of
the North.
But when the strain of trying to be perfect was too much for
Leila, she would turn on Warren and his sisters with the wrath of

God. Without warning, that good-humored woman would become
furious beyond words, and rage at her children with an unrelenting
meanness, sometimes not letting up for hours. She scolded and
degraded her children. Nothing they had done measured up. She
compared, criticized, and dredged up every imaginable failing.
In Leila’s fury, she seemed as if driven by some horrible injustice.
Nothing that Warren or his sisters had done would escape her
notice; no transgression, however slight, was too small for one of
her vicious rebukes. Even when they had committed no crime, her
imagination supplied one.
As far as Warren and his sisters knew, Leila’s moods were wholly
unpredictable, and therefore all the more terrifying. And when one
came over her there was no escape. She was a strong woman,
strong as the girl who had run the Linotype at age eleven. If they
tried to break free she would snap at them, “I’m not nished.”17
And then, suddenly, the tempest would be over. Then the sweet
little woman would return.
Once, in more recent years, one of Warren’s sons, who was
home from college, called Leila to say hello. She suddenly lit into
him with all her fury. She called him a terrible person for not
calling more often, and detailed his supposedly innumerable
failings of character, and went on for two entire hours. When
Warren’s son put down the phone, he was in tears. Warren said
softly, “Now you know how I felt every day of my life.”
Sometime after Leila left West Point, her family su ered
repeated tragedies. One of her sisters committed suicide; another
sister and Leila’s mother were institutionalized. Whatever the
streak of madness or emotional imbalance that the Stahl women
su ered, Leila at least survived.
But Warren and his sisters had to deal with the shrapnel from
her fury on their own. There was certainly no discussion of it in the
Bu ett home. One morning, when Warren was young, Howard
came downstairs and warned him, “Mom is on the warpath
again.”18 But more often, after Howard had left the house, Warren
and the girls would listen for the telltale tone of her voice and
warn one another. Their parents didn’t argue; the con ict was

between Leila and her kids. And it was a con ict that Warren and
his sisters had no chance of winning.
Warren coped with this hopeless battle by not ghting back. “He
didn’t get mad. He kept it to himself,” his sister Roberta said. Jerry
Moore, who lived across the street, observed that Warren didn’t
ght with anyone. He shied away from the usual neighborhood
scrapes—from any sort of con ict.
He didn’t mention his mother’s “moods” to his friends, and there
was nothing in his upbeat manner that would have betrayed them.
But some of the boys noticed that Warren spent more time with
them at their homes than he did at his own. Mrs. Russell used to
say, “I put him out with the cat and brought him in with the milk.”
Byron Swanson, a classmate, would come home—in that halcyon
time when Americans left their homes unlocked—and nd Warren,
innocently and rather charmingly, sitting in his kitchen, drinking a
Pepsi and eating potato chips. Walter Loomis said his mother had
to chase Warren out when Loomis’s father came home so the
family could have dinner. (In retrospect, he added dryly, “Too bad
we kicked him out.”)
Later, Warren’s son Peter would wonder if his father’s success
was driven in part by the urge to get out of the house. The question
is unanswerable, but he had the urge from somewhere. Warren
would sit on the re escape at Rosehill elementary school and
atly tell his chums that he would be rich before he was thirtyve.19 He never came across as being a braggart, or swell-headed.
(In Russell’s homely phrase, “his cap always t.”) He just had this
conviction about himself.
He would bury himself in a favorite book, One Thousand Ways to
Make $1,000, an exhortation to future Rockefellers with stories
such as “Building a Business on Homemade Fudge” and “Mrs.
MacDougall Turned $38 into a Million.” How vividly did Warren
imagine himself as the man in the illustration—dwarfed by a
mountain of coins that brought more ecstasy than any mountain of
candy! Surely, he was the reader of the editor’s dreams—so well
did he seize on the book’s advice to “begin, begin” whatever
schemes one might, but, by all means, not to wait.

On 53rd Street, Warren was known as a bookworm, and was
certi ed in the neighborhood lore as having a “photographic
memory.” He was tall for his age, and liked to play sports, but was
rather ungainly. He talked up his nancial exploits, however, with
a contagious passion. And when Warren talked, his friends perked
up their ears. He didn’t persuade the other boys to join him so much
as he attracted them—a reball, as his father said, drawing moths.
Warren recruited Stuart Erickson, Russell, and Byron Swanson to
go to Ak-Sar-Ben to scavenge for tickets. He enlisted half the
neighborhood to gather golf balls. Soon he had bushel baskets of
golf balls in his bedroom, organized by brand and price. Bill
Pritchard, a neighbor, recalled, “He’d hand out a dozen golf balls.
We’d sell ’em, and he’d take his cut.” Warren and Erickson even set
up a golf-ball stand at Elmwood Park, until, as Erickson recalled,
business was so good that “somebody snitched on us and the pro
threw us out.”
A Saturday Evening Post pro le of the Omaha of those years saw a
barren city—in the telling quip, west of civilization, which stopped
in Des Moines, and east of the scenery, which began with the
Rocky Mountains.20 It was distinguished only for its “conformity”;
extreme only in its weather. Its contribution to culture was the
Swanson dinner. Overlaid on this myth of Omaha as a cultural
wasteland was a more romantic view of Omaha as an unspoiled
refuge from the sinful East—as “simple” and vaguely pastoral.
While this had an element of truth, it was greatly exaggerated. It
would partly account for a later tendency to describe Bu ett as
oracular, rather than as talented and savvy, as a New Yorker
would have been described—as the “Oracle of Omaha” or,
repeatedly, the “Wizard of Omaha.” (The Wizard of Oz did hail
from Omaha.)
But Omaha was not a barren place to Warren. The Bu etts and
their neighbors were educated and urban and part of the cultural
mainstream. Fred Astaire learned to dance at the Chambers
Academy on Farnam Street; Henry Fonda, a local boy, appeared
on Omaha stages. Warren’s Omaha was a small city—220,000
people—but by no means a small town. Carl Sandburg, who

shoveled coal there, called it “Omaha, the roughneck, [which] feeds
armies, eats and swears from a dirty face.”21
The summer that Warren was eleven, Howard, who wanted his
children to experience the supposed purity of farm life, took out an
ad for a rural home. For a few weeks, Warren and Doris were
boarded by a farmer named Elmer Benne. Warren savored Mrs.
Benne’s pies, but he didn’t care for cows or stalks of corn. A silo
was just as remote to him as the modern Art Deco skyscrapers of
Omaha were to a farm boy. Warren was a city kid.
On 53rd Street, he knew the people in every house. And there
was a sameness to the homes, with their twin gables, brown brick,
and center doorways. He recognized the truck from Roberts Dairy,
and the music of the trolley and the not-too-distant freight trains,
and the aroma of co ee from the roasting plant downtown, and
even, when a wind blew from the south on warm summer
evenings, the thick, intolerable smell of the meatpacking plants.
Whether on foot, on his three-speed, or by streetcar, he could fan
out over the city, to the golf courses, to his father’s o ce, to his
grandfather’s store. Whatever Warren’s problems with his mother
or his torment in church, his city was his great, sustaining
constant.
But the violent shock that upset all America in December 1941
also threatened Warren’s life in Omaha. The Sunday of Pearl
Harbor, the Bu etts were paying a visit to Grandpa Stahl, in West
Point. On the drive home, they listened to martial music. For the
next few months, as America got used to war, Warren’s life went
on as before.
But in 1942, the Republicans in Nebraska’s second congressional
district were unable to nd a candidate who would run against the
party of a popular wartime president. In desperation, the GOP
turned to an outspoken New Deal hater: Howard Bu ett.
Howard, an isolationist, was given little chance of winning. On
the stump, his venom was directed not at Hitler or Mussolini but at
Franklin Roosevelt.

I am fully aware of the odds against a Republican candidate today. He ghts against
the most powerful Tammany political machine the world has ever known. This

ruthless gang, under cover of war, is making plans to fasten the chains of political
servitude around America’s neck.22

Inveighing against in ation and big government, Howard was
forty years ahead of his time. But in Omaha, he was personally
popular. He had little money—his expenses would amount to only
$2,361—but he campaigned tenaciously.
On election day, Howard typed out a concession speech and
retired at nine o’clock. The next day, he discovered he had won. He
would call it “one of the happiest surprises” of his life.
Warren realized his fate with a jolt: for the rst time in his
twelve-plus years, he was leaving Omaha. In a family photograph
taken just after the election, Warren looked decidedly uneasy, his
handsome face set in a vague stare, his tightly pursed lips
managing only the slightest suggestion of a smile.
As space in wartime Washington was scarce, Howard rented a
home in the charming but remote Virginia town of Fredericksburg.
The house stood on a hill, overlooking the Rappahannock River. It
was a rambling white Colonial place with a front porch and roses.
To Roberta, it looked “like something out of the movies.” Warren
hated it.
Cinematic though it may have been, Fredericksburg was isolated,
Southern, and unfamiliar. Any change would have been
unwelcome to Warren, and this one turned his world upside down.
Not only had he been yanked away from friends and
neighborhood, but he was separated during the week from his
father, who was residing at the Dodge Hotel, in Washington, fty
miles north. The freshman congressman told his family that he
would serve only one term, but that didn’t comfort his son. Away
from Omaha and from all that he knew, Warren was “miserably
homesick.”23
Though he was desperate to leave, it was not in his nature to
confront his folks. He merely told them that he was su ering from
a mysterious “allergy” and that he couldn’t sleep at night. Of

course, his Zen-like stoicism was perfectly calculated to unnerve
them. He would recall, “I told my parents I couldn’t breathe. I told
them not to worry about it, to get a good night’s sleep themselves,
and I’d just stand up all night.”24 Naturally, they were worried sick
about him. † Meanwhile, Warren wrote to Grandpa Ernest and told
him that he was unhappy. In short order, Ernest wrote back and
suggested that Warren move in with him and his Aunt Alice and
nish the eighth grade in Omaha. After a few weeks in
Fredericksburg, his parents agreed.
Warren went back on the train, sharing an overnight
compartment with Hugh Butler, a Nebraska senator. At daybreak,
Senator Butler, noticing that the youngster had passed the night
soundly, commented, “I thought you couldn’t sleep.” Warren
replied airily, “Oh, I got rid of that in Pennsylvania.”25
In Omaha, Warren’s spirits revived. Aunt Alice, a free-spirited
home economics teacher, was a kind guardian, and she took an
interest in Warren. Like other teachers, she was attracted to his
brightness and curiosity.
Grandpa Ernest, an instinctive teacher, also took a shine to him.
Ernest was working on a book, and each night he dictated a few
pages to Warren.26 The recherché title was “How to Run a Grocery
Store, and a Few Things I Have Learned About Fishing.” The thrust
of it is evident from a letter in which Ernest con dently declared
that supermarkets were a passing fad:
Kroger, Montgomery & Ward, and Safeway, I think have seen their high points. The
chain stores are going to have a hard time from now on.27

Fortunately, “How to Run a Grocery Store” was never published.
But Warren went to work at Bu ett & Son, where he observed
his grandfather’s maxims rsthand. Ernest took it upon himself to
deduct two pennies a day from Warren’s meager salary—a gesture
which, along with his lectures on the work ethic, was intended to
impress upon Warren the intolerable costs of government
programs such as Social Security. For a twelve-year-old boy, the
work itself was hard: lifting crates, hauling soda pop. Warren

didn’t care for it. He didn’t like the smell of groceries. When fruit
spoiled, he had to clean the bins.28
But he liked the store. Bu ett & Son was a cozy nook of a
grocery, with squeaky wooden oors, rotating fans, and rows of
wooden shelves that reached to the ceiling. When someone wanted
a can from the upper shelf, Warren or another clerk would move a
sliding ladder to the proper spot and ascend to the summit.
It was the rst successful business that Warren had seen. His
Uncle Fred, who stood behind the counter, had a cheerful word for
every shopper. With its pungent, fresh-baked breads, ripe cheeses,
and unwrapped cookies and nuts, Bu ett & Son had something—an
adherence, perhaps, to Grandpa’s penny-pinching virtues—that
pulled people back.29
Charlie Munger, Warren’s future business partner, worked there
on Saturdays (though he did not meet Warren until years later).
Munger saw in the store the inculcation of a culture, something out
of a Norman Rockwell painting. Nobody ever loafed. “You were
just goddam busy from the rst hour of morning to night.” When
Bill Bu ett, Warren’s cousin, would trudge in a few minutes late,
he would be greeted by his portly, white-haired grandfather,
pocket watch in hand, bellowing from a second- oor balcony,
“Billy, what time is it?”
While living at Ernest’s, Warren often went to the home of Carl
Falk, his father’s then business partner, for lunch. He would curl up
with an investment book from Falk’s study—much more his cup of
tea than groceries—while Mrs. Falk made lunch. One time, while
Warren was slurping Mary Falk’s chicken noodle soup, he declared
that he would be a millionaire by age thirty—and enigmatically
added, “and if not, I’m going to jump o the tallest building in
Omaha.”
Mary Falk was horri ed, and told him not to repeat it. Warren
looked at her and laughed. Nonetheless, she couldn’t resist his
charm, and always made him welcome in the Falk home. Mary
Falk seems to have been the rst to ask: “Warren, why this drive to
make so much money?”

“It’s not that I want money,” Warren replied. “It’s the fun of
making money and watching it grow.”
The nal months of eighth grade, Warren enjoyed a reprieve. He
was reunited with his chums, and he had the run of the city, from
the Bu ett store in the western suburbs to the cobblestone streets
downtown, bustling with open-air markets and red-brick and castiron warehouses, where Sidney, the rst Bu ett in Omaha, had set
up his store, three-quarters of a century earlier. Already the fourth
generation of Bu etts in Omaha, Warren was immensely at home
there. He had the city’s informal style, its plain prairie syntax, and
also its opaque, unemotional cover. He was hardly “simple,” but in
his essential features—his dawning self-reliance, his ambitious but
prudent capitalist zeal, and his composed, calm exterior—he was
unmistakably Midwestern. Alas, by the fall of 1943, Warren had
run out of excuses for not joining the family in Washington. His
reprieve had run out.
* Nebraska spelled backward.
† Asked years later whether Warren was in fact standing up, Doris said, “Goodness, no. He
was sleeping.”

Chapter 2

RUNAWAY

The Bu etts had moved to a four-bedroom house in Spring Valley,
an outlying section of Washington, on Northwest 49th Street. The
home was white-painted brick, with an open porch in front and a
driveway that sloped to the rear. It was a typically modest young
congressman’s home—the Richard Nixons would be their neighbors
—a short walk from Massachusetts Avenue. Behind the house was
nothing but woods.
Warren’s new life revolved around his job as a carrier for the
Washington Post. Now thirteen, he kept a record of his earnings and
led a tax return—and de antly refused to let his dad pay the
taxes.1
But aside from his paper route, Warren was profoundly
unhappy. At Alice Deal Junior High, he caused a bit of trouble for
his teachers, and his grades were mediocre.2 Young for his class,
having skipped a grade, he was bespectacled and out of the social
stream. His appearance was so slovenly that the principal warned
Leila that he had better shape up.3
In June, at the end of that rst, unhappy year, Warren ran away
—the rst real rebellion of his life. He and Roger Bell, the son of a
Missouri congressman, and one other chum put out their thumbs

for Hershey, Pennsylvania. Warren knew of a golf course there
and thought they could stay a few days and caddie. But for once,
economics were not his motivation. He was mad at his folks, mad
at being in Washington-mad all around.4
The boys arrived at nightfall, without so much as a toothbrush,
and checked into a room at the Community Inn. In the morning,
no sooner were they out the door than the police stopped them.
Bell was short, while Warren and the other boy were close to six
feet. From a distance, the police thought Bell much younger—
perhaps a kidnap victim—and took the trio in for questioning. One
may imagine Warren, just shy of fourteen, glibly persuading the
authorities of their innocence without saying much about what
they were doing. The police let them go, but their balloon was
pricked. They thumbed their way home that day.
It seems unlikely that Warren was of a mind to continue his
rather halfhearted revolt. His spurts of acting out at school had
been pretty tame; according to his sister Roberta, “rebellious” was
“a pretty strong word” for him.
But Howard and Leila were shocked. Though they were gentle
with Warren when he returned to Washington, Howard resolved to
nip his mutiny in the bud. He told Warren that he would have to
improve his marks or give up his paper route.
This worked on Warren’s grades like a tonic. Far from
relinquishing the paper route, he expanded it. He promptly
procured a route with the Times-Herald, the Post’s morning
competitor, covering the same territory as he had with the Post. As
Bu ett would recall, if a subscriber canceled one paper and wanted
the other, “there was my shining face the next day.”5 Soon Warren
had ve delivery routes, and close to ve hundred papers to deliver
each morning. Leila would arise early to make his breakfast;
Warren was out the door by ve-twenty to catch the bus down
Massachusetts Avenue. On the rare occasion when he was ill, Leila
did the route, but she didn’t go near the money. “Collections were
everything to him,” she wrote. “You didn’t dare touch the drawer
where he kept his money. Every penny had to be there.”

Warren’s crown jewel was the Westchester Apartments, a cluster
of red-brick, eight-story high-rises on Cathedral Avenue. He quickly
developed an assembly-line approach that was worthy of the
young Henry Ford. He would drop o half of the papers for each
building on the eighth- oor elevator landing and half on the fourth
oor. Then he would run through the building on foot, oor by
oor, sliding the papers in front of each apartment. On collection
day, he left an envelope at the front desk, sparing him from
having to go door-to-door. When the Bu etts returned to Omaha
for the summer, Warren entrusted the route to a friend, Walter
Diehl, and lectured him on how to handle it. Diehl remembered,
“There was this pile of papers sitting in front of you—a mountain.
But it only took an hour and a quarter or so. It was a beautiful
route. All the buildings were connected underground. You never
had to go outside.”
Figuring that he could increase his pro ts by adding to his
product line, Warren peddled magazines at the apartments, too.
The trick was to o er subscriptions at just the right time. Some of
his customers, Bu ett would recall, “left their magazines out on the
stairwell. You could tell by tearing o the address label when the
expirations were. So I would keep track of when everybody’s
subscriptions expired.”6
Though the apartments were considered classy—Warren saw
Jacqueline Bouvier in the elevator—he had a problem with
deadbeats. In wartime Washington, people were frequently
moving in and out, sometimes neglecting to pay him. So Warren
made a deal with the elevator girls. They got free papers; Warren
got tipped o when anyone was planning to move!7
In short, Warren had turned his paper routes into a business. He
was earning $175 a month—what many a young man was earning
as a full-time wage—and saving every dime.8 In 1945, when he
was still only fourteen, he took $1,200 of his pro ts and invested it
in forty acres of Nebraska farmland.
World War II, of course, was the omnipresent backdrop to
Warren’s Washington years. There were bond drives at school and
blackout curtains at home. Nevertheless, the war had little direct

impact on him. The single exception was in August 1945, when the
Bu etts were spending the summer in Omaha. Warren heard the
news about Hiroshima and had a lively discussion about the atom
bomb with Jerry Moore, his Omaha neighbor. Warren, Moore
recalled, was quite concerned. He viewed relativity as he did
religion—with unshaking, terrifying logic. “We were talking—I
remember it vividly—on my front lawn. He was afraid of the
implications of the chain reaction … of the possible devastation of
the world.”
Back in Washington, at Woodrow Wilson High, Warren was
tting in a bit better. His paper routes had given him an escape
from homesickness, and he began to develop a set of friends. As in
Omaha, he got a crew to hunt for golf balls. He also was a pretty
good golfer and joined the school team.
Robert Dwyer, the golf coach, was another teacher- gure that
Warren cultivated. Dwyer thought him funny—eager without being
pushy. He took Warren to the track and taught him how to read
the Daily Racing Form. In the summer after Warren’s junior year,
Dwyer and Warren happened to be playing golf on the day of the
All-Star game. It started to rain, so they went to Dwyer’s car and
turned on the game. Charlie Keller, the New York Yankee slugger,
was up. Dwyer said, “If you give me twenty-to-one odds, I’ll bet
you he hits a home run.” Warren said, “I’ll take a dollar’s worth.”
Keller, of course, hit one. Dwyer was kind enough to lose the $20
on another bet.
But as both of them knew, Warren was making more money
than his coach.9 Marooned in a strange city, he was trying to
jump-start his career at a time when he was barely capable of
shaving. He was reading every business book he could get his
hands on, poring over actuarial tables, running his paper route.
Donald Danly, a Wilson student who became a good friend,
thought Warren “was charting his way toward a [ nancial]
target.”
Danly, the son of a Justice Department attorney, was a serious
and brilliant student. At rst glance, he and Warren had little in
common. Danly had a good-looking girlfriend, whereas Warren

didn’t date. And Danly was chie y interested in science. But Danly,
who had lost his mother, began to spend a lot of time at the
Bu etts’ after the war, when Danly’s father went to Japan to
prosecute war criminals. The two played music together, Warren
strumming on the ukulele while Danly played the piano. Then they
discovered that Danly’s love of science and Warren’s obsession
with business had a shared language—numbers. They would
calculate the odds of poker hands, or the chances, in a room with a
dozen people, that two would have the same birthday. Or Danly
would rattle o a series of two-digit numbers, waiting for Warren
to spit out the sum.
In their senior year, Danly bought a used pinball machine for
$25, and Warren and he played it by the hour. The machine often
broke, and as Danly tinkered with it, Warren took note of his
friend’s mechanical skill. Warren had an idea: why not put the
machine in the barber shop on Wisconsin Avenue and rent it out?10
Warren approached the barber, who agreed to a fty- fty split.
At the end of the rst day, they found $14 in the machine. Within
a month or so, Warren and Danly had machines in three
barbershops. Prospering, they expanded to seven. Warren—living
a real-life fantasy—thought of a name, the Wilson Coin Operated
Machine Company. “Eventually we were making $50 a week,” he
recalled. “I hadn’t dreamed life could be so good.”11
Wilson Coin Op had a natural division of labor. Warren put up
most of the capital for the machines, secondhand arcade games
that cost from $25 to $75 apiece. Danly repaired them. Warren
kept the books and typed a monthly nancial statement. Barbers
were instructed to call Danly if a machine broke—one was always
breaking—and the two of them would show up pronto in Danly’s
1938 Buick, which had had the backseat removed.
Fearing that the pinball business was controlled by the mob,
Warren stuck to small, out-of-the-way locations. Also, he and
Danly hinted that they were merely legmen for a going concern
that was not to be taken lightly. Bu ett recalled:

The barbershop operators were always pushing us to put in new machines, and we’d

always tell them we’d take it up with the boss. We pretended like we were these hired
hands that were carrying machines around and counting money.12

Once a week they made the rounds, sometimes with Danly’s
girlfriend, Norma Jean Thurston. Warren would return to the car
with a funny description of the barber, or of what he’d said to him,
and the three of them would howl. Warren could see the twist—the
irony of these kids acting out the role of being big-time
businessmen.
Norma Jean thought Warren was especially funny. She was
pretty and slender, with arched eyebrows and striking blond hair.
Her nickname was “Peroxide.” Danly was “Duck,” but Warren was
simply “Bu ett.” Their elders had fought a war, but Bu ett, Duck,
and Peroxide were still in a state of innocence. Though they were
natural hams, they didn’t smoke or use swear words, and Warren
didn’t drink anything but Pepsi-Cola. All the girls that Norma Jean
knew were virgins; in her crowd there was hardly any sex. But
Warren was a shade more innocent still. He didn’t go to the Fridaynight dances; “he didn’t have the moves other guys had,” Norma
Jean said. “He didn’t try.”
He walked with his shoulders hunched forward and bent toward
the ground, tramp, tramp, like a billy goat. At times, he carried a
clunky-looking change purse strapped to his belt.13 To his Wilson
classmates, Warren’s footwear marked him as a hayseed, and they
remembered it after decades. “We used to get a kick out of Warren
and his sneakers,” remembered Casper Heindl. “He used to wear
’em year-round. I don’t care if the snow was a foot deep, he had
sneakers on.” And Robert Moore said, “I remember him very well.
The one thing we used to joke about—he didn’t wear anything
other than tennis shoes. Even in the dead of winter.”
Warren seemed to take a perverse delight in those sneakers.
“Most of us were trying to be like everyone else,” Norma Jean
noted. “The girls all buttoned their sweaters in the back. I think he
liked being di erent.” Though he was high-spirited and perpetually
kidding, there was something of the odd man out about him. When

his quirks were pointed out, he would stick to his guns, or kid
himself, with self-deprecation. Norma Jean said, “He was what he
was and he never tried to be anything else.”
At the dinner table at home, Warren was getting a nightly
seminar on sticking to one’s guns. Howard, who despite his pledge
to serve one term was reelected in 1944 and again in 1946, was in
the fabled do-nothing Congress, so named for ghting Truman at
every turn. In the evenings, he would expose the family to a
drumbeat of dire alarums. Once, when the family was discussing
what to get one of Howard’s aides for Christmas, little Roberta
piped up, “How about a savings bond—or does he know that
they’re no good?”
Another time, after having voted against a popular labor
measure, Howard took Warren to a baseball game in Omaha.
When the congressman was introduced to the crowd, he was
roundly booed.14 But he showed Warren no sign that he minded.
Unshakably ethical, Howard refused o ers of junkets and even
turned down a part of his pay. During his rst term, when the
congressional salary was raised from $10,000 to $12,500, Howard
left the extra money in the Capitol disbursement o ce, insisting
that he had been elected at the lower salary.
Leila said her husband considered only one issue in voting on a
measure: “Will this add to, or subtract from, human liberty?” But
his view of liberty was decidedly cramped. His single interest was
in rolling back the enlarged government that Roosevelt, and World
War II, had made permanent.
During the war, he coauthored a letter demanding that the
United States “elaborate” on its policy of seeking an unconditional
German surrender and posing the curious question “What are we
ghting for?”15 Did uprooting Nazism not constitute “an addition
to human liberty?”
After the war, he voted against aiding bombed-out Britain,
against school lunches, against European grain exports, and
against the Bretton Woods monetary scheme.16 At his worst, his
Americanism lapsed into xenophobia and Red-baiting. As the
Bu etts drove past the still-lit British embassy in the evenings,

Howard would growl, “They even stay up late to think of ways to
get our money.”17 He opposed the Marshall Plan to rebuild
Western Europe as “Operation Rathole,” and as possibly having
Stalin’s secret backing.18
On several issues, Howard was remarkably prescient. One of his
few proposals was a measure to protect the owners of U.S. savings
bonds against in ation. Yet the broad sense of his tenure is that of
a moralist dis gured by parochial, and extremist, claims.
Warren mouthed his father’s politics,19 and probably believed
them super cially, but he didn’t commit himself to them. He
absorbed his father’s patriotism, but not his bitter isolationism. A
few years later, Warren wryly alluded to his father’s dogmatism in
a letter to a college friend. “I had better knock this o ,” Warren
wrote, “and go out and help my dad conduct a crusade against
something or other.”20
He did inherit his father’s scruples and concern for society.
(Indeed, Warren would later revile the corporate theft of other
people’s money in much the same terms that Howard critiqued the
government’s.) But for Warren, who had witnessed the Depression
and the war as a child, government was society’s defender, not its
enemy. Given his utter devotion to his father, his political
awareness, though still undeveloped, suggested a stirring of
independence.
Warren had already decided that he would not follow his father
into government. When Norma Jean asked whether he might make
a life in Washington, Warren replied without hesitation, “No. I’m
going to live in Omaha.”
By his senior year, he was planning on a career not just in
business, but speci cally in investing. Sitting in the breakfast nook
at home, at an age when other boys didn’t get past the sports
pages, he was already studying the stock tables. And word of his
supposed expertise had followed him to school, where his teachers
tried to pick his brain about the market.21
In a wily e ort to capitalize on his renown, Warren shorted—
that is, bet against—shares of American Telephone & Telegraph
Company, because he knew that his teachers owned it. “They

thought I knew about stocks and I thought if I shorted AT&T, I
would terrorize them about their retirement.”22
Why this mild repute as an oracle? Warren hadn’t had any coups
in the market. Yet people sensed that he knew. He had something
innate: not merely a precocious store of knowledge, but an ability
for casting it in logical terms. Faith didn’t move him, but facts he
could assemble in a smooth and sensible train. Quoting Danly: “He
just seemed to have tremendous insight. He would say things in a
way that didn’t leave any doubt that he knew what he was talking
about.”
Warren graduated in June 1947, nishing sixteenth in a class of
374. (Danly was tied for rst.) The Wilson yearbook captured him
with bright, eager eyes, neatly parted hair, and a sheepish grin.
The caption: “Likes math … a future stockbroker.”
Howard suggested the nearby Wharton School of Finance and
Commerce at the University of Pennsylvania. Warren replied that
college would be a waste. He had delivered almost 600,000 papers
and in the process earned over $5,000.23 Money was coming in
from newspapers, from Wilson Coin Op, and from a Nebraska
tenant farmer. What’s more, he had read at least one hundred
books on business. What, in short, did he have to learn?
Howard gently pointed out that Warren was still two months shy
of his seventeenth birthday. Finally, Warren capitulated. In
August, Wilson Coin Op was sold for $1,200 to a returned war
veteran. Warren pocketed his share and headed for Wharton.
This time, though, Howard had been wrong. Despite Wharton’s
ne reputation, its curriculum was lacking in beef. Warren
disgustedly reported that he knew more than the professors. His
dissatisfaction—a forerunner of his general disa ection for
business schools—was rooted in their mushy, overbroad approach.
His professors had fancy theories but were ignorant of the practical
details of making a pro t that Warren craved.
When Warren visited Omaha, Mary Falk warned him not to
neglect his studies. He replied insouciantly, “Mary, all I need to do
is open the book the night before and drink a big bottle of PepsiCola and I’ll make 100.”

In fact, he was spending a lot of his time at a brokerage o ce in
Philadelphia, following various stocks.24 But he didn’t have a
system for investing—or if he did, it was haphazard. He would
study the charts, he would listen to tips. But he didn’t have a
framework. He was searching.
In his freshman year, Warren roomed with Charles Peterson, an
Omaha boy (and later, among Warren’s rst investors). He also
made fast friends with Harry Beja, a Mexican who was as
displaced on a northeastern campus as Warren was. Beja was the
most serious student on campus, but Warren would kid him about
living with the “Indians” in Mexico. The two of them matched
A+’s in Industry 1, but Beja couldn’t help but notice how much
harder he had worked in the course than Warren had. Nonetheless,
though he resented Warren’s easy success, Beja had to admit that
he liked Warren. Beja saw him as the type of American he had
idealized: the honest and unassuming Midwesterner with a
common touch.
Warren found another kindred soul in Beja’s roommate, a
Brooklyn boy named Jerry Orans. They met in the weight room,
and the broad-shouldered Orans instantly decided that Warren was
a “genius.” Like Warren, Orans felt a bit out of the swing; he was
dreadfully homesick and spent much of the rst year in tears.25 But
he had a rapier wit and a warm smile, and was very bright
himself. Warren and Orans became close friends.
Unwittingly, Warren was sowing the seeds for a future pool of
investors.* But at the time, he felt he was going nowhere. After a
year at Penn, he wanted out, but his father insisted that he try
another year. In Washington for the summer, Warren found a
comical outlet for his rich-man strivings—once again with Don
Danly. His pinball partner had plunked down $350 for an old
Rolls-Royce. Warren went with Danly to a Baltimore junkyard to
pick it up and followed him back to Washington. Just inside the
District line, they were stopped by the police. Danly recounted:
I had no plates, the taillights didn’t work. The cop was

xing to write up a ticket.

Warren said, “Look, o cer, we just have to get it home to my garage so we can x it

up to meet all of the safety requirements.” He was talking and talking and he just kept
talking until the cop said okay.

Danly kept the Rolls in the Bu etts’ garage. They spent the
summer xing it up—though, of course, Danly was the one who
was under the chassis. Warren would sit on a stool, entertaining
his friend with business stories and reading from a book they
thought was a scream—How to Lose Friends and Alienate People.
The Rolls was a 1928 Ladies’ Shopping Car. It had a single seat
in front and a wide berth in back, and a hand crank for show.
Danly and Norma Jean painted it dark blue. They rented it out a
few times, but the real point was to be seen in it. Warren proposed
that they drive downtown, posing as a rich couple with their
chau eur—but he would play the rich “aristocrat,” Danly the
chau eur. Danly put on Howard Bu ett’s black overcoat and took
the wheel, and Warren, wearing a muskrat coat and top hat, sidled
in next to Norma Jean. As they approached the Times-Herald
building, Danly, following a script, cut o the ignition and coasted
to a stop. Then he got out and started tinkering under the hood, as
if he were trying to gure out what was wrong. When people
started to stare, Warren—the aristocrat—tapped on the windshield
glass with a cane and pointed, as if indicating where the trouble
might be. Danly ddled a bit more and—behold—it was “ xed.”†
But without a script, Warren was hardly so suave. He dated
Norma Jean’s cousin, Barbara Worley, over the summer, and took
her to hear Billie Holiday. But though Warren was a lively
companion, he ruined any hope of romance by subjecting Worley
to an unending series of riddles and “brainteasers”—presumably,
an activity that relieved Warren’s awkwardness. When he nally
screwed up his courage and invited her for a weekend at Penn,
Worley turned him down.
In his sophomore year, Warren lived at the Alpha Sigma Phi
house, a Victorian mansion on Spruce Street with high ceilings and
a stately spiral stair. He was ambivalent toward his fraternity
brothers—not aloof, but not quite part of their rituals, either. After
lunch, he would plop himself in a curved bridge chair by a bay

window and join in a game of hearts or bridge. In a conversational
setting, such as at mealtimes, Warren was very alive—loose and
con dent with his opinions. In those years, fraternity members
were served by waiters and dressed in jackets and ties for dinner.
Anthony Vecchione, recalling Warren’s table chatter, said, “When
he was on he was fun—a lot of laughs.”
He was a very funny kid, very clever. It wasn’t bo o slapstick, it was dry. He had a
semicynical view of the way things worked. I remember he said if he ever got rich,

he’d install steam-heated toilet seats in the bathroom. He said that had to be the
ultimate.

But Warren was aching for some sort of intellectual—or
nancial-stimulus. Penn was a rah-rah school; campus life in 1948
revolved around pep rallies and the top-ten football team.
Ironically, Warren was portrayed on the cover of Penn Pics, a
student magazine, as the model fan, decked in a derby hat and
raccoon coat, one hand waving a banner, the other o ering a
brandy ask to his apparent date, with a cigar extending from a
jaunty grin, all against a photographic montage depicting the
Penn marching band and a leather-helmeted ball carrier.
The cover was a joke; Warren’s friend Jerry Orans was one of
the editors. In truth, Warren was everything that the cover boy
was not. He was a nondrinker, was uncomfortable with women,
and was not a big socializer. On a campus with so many older
students—returned GIs—he even looked out of place. With his hair
unslicked, the skinny eighteen-year-old student looked like a
visiting kid brother.
His youthfulness was especially apparent in the context of sex.
Besides being inexperienced with women, he was noticeably ill-atease with the fellows’ locker-room humor. “I remember distinctly,”
said Vecchione, the son of a Long Island subcontractor, “when
people started talking about sex, he’d look at the oor. His face
would get ushed.”
On weekends, when Alpha Sigma threw beer parties, the
monastic frat house was ooded with women. Warren usually did

not have a date, but—of importance for a future investor—he was
comfortable without being part of the crowd. While most of the
guys had their arms around a date, Warren would sit on the couch
and entertain the party with a little dissertation on the gold
standard. He was so captivating that the fellows made a party
routine of having Warren stand in a corner and peppering him
with questions about economics and politics. “He’d start holding
forth, and before a minute or two had gone by he’d have an
audience, maybe ten to twenty people,” remembered William
Wayne Jones, a fellow nondrinker and a future Methodist
missionary. “He would do it so humbly you were just in thrall. He’d
say, ‘I really don’t know much about this, but it looks to me …’ ”
Warren’s fraternity mates were in awe of his intellect.26 He
would read a chapter, they recalled, and recite it by rote. In class,
when a graduate lecturer would parrot an answer from the text,
Warren, who had it memorized, would burst out, “You forgot the
comma.”27 Moreover, the way he glibly critiqued the faculty left
his fellows spellbound. One of the frat brothers, Richard Kendall,
said, “Warren came to the conclusion that there wasn’t anything
Wharton could teach him. And he was right.”
When the brothers returned to Wharton in the fall of 1949, they
were stunned to nd that Warren wasn’t there. Vecchione said,
“He just evaporated at the end of the second year. Nobody ever
heard from him again.”28 In short, he had run away once more. His
father had been defeated in 1948 and had returned with the family
to Omaha, leaving Warren alone in the East. In Wharton, there
had been nothing to keep him—no paper route, no pinball. He
transferred to the familiar University of Nebraska at Lincoln,
where his parents had met. “I didn’t feel I was learning that
much,” Warren explained. “Nebraska called, Wharton repelled.”29
Among his Alpha Sigma brothers, the memory that stuck was of
Warren’s playing bridge, in an alcove by the great bay window.
Otherwise, he almost seemed not to have been there.

From the time he returned to Nebraska, Bu ett was a student only
in name. In fact, he was launching his career. During the summer,
he took a job at J.C. Penney, where he was o ered (but declined) a
position for after college. Feeling more comfortable on his home
turf, he also began to date more. Writing to “Dear Monster” (Jerry
Orans), a jocular Bu ett was feeling his oats:
The latest girl I have been dating casually mentioned to me that she played tennis so

thinking I would impress the little gal with a show of cave-man masculinity I o ered
to give her the opportunity to see me work out from across the net. She trounced
me.30

He planned a Herculean load— ve courses in the fall of 1949 and
six in the spring of 1950, mostly in business and economics. But his
focus was o -campus. Bu ett had taken a newspaper job, he
explained to Orans, that involved “50 little boys calling me ‘Mr.
Bu ett.’ ” He was supervising paperboys in six rural counties for
the Lincoln Journal, traveling southeastern Nebraska in a 1941
Ford. The job paid seventy- ve cents an hour. Mark Seacrest, the
head of circulation, was dubious that a student could handle the
load. But Bu ett was “all charged up.” He would come in each
week to get his assignments and be o in a ash. To Bu ett, it was
a man-sized job. In his words:
If you have a down route in Seward or Pawnee City or Weeping Water, Nebraska,

you’re looking for a kid to deliver fteen papers a day or something of the sort and

you got to nd him late in the afternoon or early in evening while you’re attending
college—it’s an education.31

In Lincoln, Bu ett lived with Truman Wood, then a anced to
Warren’s sister Doris, in the upstairs of a Victorian house on
Pepper Avenue. Bu ett would come back from his newspaper work
in the late afternoon, read the Wall Street Journal, and go out with
Wood to a greasy spoon for a dinner such as mashed potatoes,
beef, and gravy. Wood, intrigued that Bu ett had read the Bible
three or four times and remained agnostic, could not resist trying

to convert him. They had the usual debates about faith and the
afterlife, but Bu ett was immovable. For every argument that
Wood raised, Bu ett had a deadly logical response.
Apart from their bull sessions, Bu ett was rushing to nish
college in three years, working a virtually full-time job, keeping up
his bridge game, and racking up A’s. Also, as he wrote to Orans in
the fall, he had submitted a dozen entries in the hopes of winning
a $100 Burma-Shave jingle contest, ‡ and had lined up a date with
“a German gal that looks all right.”
In the winter, Bu ett revived his golf-ball business—this time as
a serious enterprise, with Orans as his agent in Philadelphia. In
January 1950, Bu ett implored his friend to get down to business.
I don’t imagine the boys back there are playing much golf yet and I can guarantee
March 1st delivery on the type of balls you want so don’t hesitate on getting orders.32

Bu ett promised to make good the losses on any “duds” and
assured Orans that the quality of his golf balls was okay.
Nonetheless, he added, “don’t get them near any real heat.” As an
afterthought, Bu ett mentioned that he had gotten through nals
“pretty good” and listed his courses for the spring. In April, having
sent Orans a shipment, he sent his chum a lighthearted—but
pointed—reminder that “Bu ett’s Golf Enterprises” was not a
charitable venture.
By this time I imagine you are bathing in luxury with the enormous pro ts you

undoubtedly reaped from the sale of those gleaming beauties I mailed your father’s
partner in crime. However, don’t forget that Philadelphia’s prosperity is not shared by
Lincoln until you dispatch a check for the token sum of $65.94.33

In the summer, Bu ett continued his breakneck pace, moving in
with his parents and taking three courses in Omaha so he could get
the credits to graduate. By July, he had sold 220 dozen golf balls
and had reaped $1,200 from them.34 From all his ventures
combined, he had saved $9,800.

That tri ing grubstake would be the source of every dollar that
Bu ett would earn.35 He had tracked every penny—the Cities
Service stock, the paper route, the golf-ball sales, the pinball—in
squiggly, uneven handwriting. So prophetic was his ledger of later
exploits that it called to the mind of one journalist the papers that
“Horatio Alger might have donated to the Baker Library at the
Harvard Business School.”36
Bu ett had in fact applied to Harvard Business School. He
con dently wrote to Orans, who had opted for Columbia Law
School: “Egad! Big Jerry, reconsider and join me at Harvard.”37 In
the summer, Bu ett took a train to Chicago to meet an alumnus.
Scrawny and unpolished, and merely nineteen, he struck his
interviewer as not quite Harvard. The session was over in ten
minutes.38 Writing “Big Jerry” on July 19, Bu ett needed ve
paragraphs to work up to the news. He informed his friend that he
was taking a tax course and learning “all the shrewd angles that
clip the dollars from the return.” There followed talk of his
“famous cannonball serve,” get-well wishes for Orans’s
convalescing father, and an update on golf-ball sales.
Now for the blow. Those stu ed-shirts at Harvard didn’t see there [sic] way clear to

admit me to their graduate school. They decided 19 was too young to get admitted and
advised me to wait a year or two. Therefore I am now faced with the grim realities of

life since I start paying room and board here in four weeks. My dad wants me to go on
to some graduate school but I’m not too sold on the idea.

Two weeks later, there was no holding back. “Dear Big Jerry,” he
wrote.
To tell you the truth, I was kind of snowed when I heard from Harvard. Presently, I

am waiting for an application blank from Columbia. They have a pretty good nance
department there; at least they have a couple of hot shots in Graham and Dodd that
teach common stock valuation.39

Bu ett was being a bit too nonchalant. Benjamin Graham, in fact,
was the dean of the securities profession; he and his colleague

David Dodd had written the seminal textbook in the eld, Security
Analysis. And Bu ett had read Graham’s new book, The Intelligent
Investor, while at Lincoln, and had found it highly captivating.
Wood, Bu ett’s housemate, said, “It was almost like he had found a
god.”40 His jocular reference to Columbia’s “hot shots” may be
taken as posturing at a moment when he feared being rejected
again. But in August, Bu ett got some good news. He was going to
New York, to study with the master.
* Orans would be a Bu ett investor and a lifelong admirer. He later suggested that Beja also

invest, but Beja was determined to prove that he could do as well on his own. Thereafter, he
said, Orans would call him a couple of times a year to tell him what Warren was worth. “It
would just go up and up.”

† Danly went on to have an accomplished career as a chemical engineer with Monsanto. In
retirement, he bought a Jaguar.

‡ Bu ett’s best: “If missin’ on kissin’—Hey Listen, try thissen—Burma-Shave.”

Chapter 3

GRAHAM

Mr. Market is very obliging indeed.
Every day he tells you what
he thinks your interest is worth.
BENJAMIN GRAHAM ,
THE INTELLIGENT INVESTOR

Bu ett had been fascinated by stocks since he had rst chalked
them up on the blackboard. He had traded stocks, studied the
market, consulted oracles, and looked for the great epiphany—
some mystical correlation in the charts, some system that would
make him rich. Yet he was no further, really, than when he had
combed the oor of the racetrack, looking for discarded ticket
stubs. Some stocks would place, but many more would not.
Ben Graham opened the door, and in a way that spoke to Bu ett
personally. He gave Bu ett the tools to explore the market’s
manifold possibilities, and also an approach that t his student’s
temper. Armed with Graham’s techniques, Bu ett could dismisss
the oracles and make use of his native talents. And steeled by the
example of Graham’s character, Bu ett would be able to work with

his trademark self-reliance—with the “sweetness” of Emersonian
independence of which Bu ett had heard from his father.
Yet Graham was far more than Bu ett’s tutor. It was Graham
who provided the rst reliable map to that wondrous and often
forbidding city, the stock market. He laid out a methodological
basis for picking stocks, previously a pseudoscience similar to
gambling. Investing without Graham would be like communism
without Marx—the discipline would scarcely exist.
And groundbreaking as they were, Graham’s writings did not
explain in full the hold he had on his disciples. Unlike other Wall
Street practitioners, Graham was open with his thoughts and freely
shared his ideas. Wall Street interested him merely as an
abstraction—the money meant nothing to him. In a eld that was
lled with narrow minds, Graham was also classical scholar, a
student of Latin and Greek, a translator of Spanish poetry, and the
author of a Broadway play—which closed in four nights. Oddly, for
one who revolutionized investing, he spent much of his time
working on quirky avocations and inventions, such as a new kind
of slide rule and “more practical” pieces of furniture. (That was
abstract, too; it is unlikely that Graham ever held a hammer.)1 He
was short, with penetrating, light blue eyes and thick lips—“a
funny little guy, sort of ugly,” as an associate said—but possessed
of a spark.2
He came into the world as Benjamin Grossbaum, in London, in
1894.3 When he was a year old, his father moved the family to
New York to open a branch of a china-importing business.
However, he died when Ben was nine. His mother put her savings
in the market, and was wiped out in the panic of 1907. Ben took
odd jobs, excelled at Boys High in Brooklyn, and entered Columbia.
When he graduated, in 1914, he was o ered posts in three
departments—English, mathematics, and philosophy. But he took
the advice of a college dean and went to Wall Street.4
Graham started at the lowest rung, earning $12 a week chalking
prices on a blackboard.5 While there were no securities analysts in
those days, merely “statisticians,” he quickly made his mark as an

investor and also began to write. By the late 1920s, he was
lecturing on nance after work.
His Wall Street lectures re ected his passion for geometry.
Namely, he was anxious to systematize investing—to devise a set
of Euclidean principles that would work for the stock market.
Graham’s approach—an oddity in the speculative climate of the
late 1920s—was to look for companies that were so cheap as to be
free of risk. In 1926, for example, he discovered that Northern Pipe
Line, an oil transporter, owned, in addition to its pipeline assets, a
portfolio of railroad bonds worth $95 for each of its shares. Yet the
stock was trading for only $65. Graham bought two thousand
shares, and suggested that the company sell its bonds as a means
of recouping its buried portfolio value. The management, which
was controlled by the Rockefellers, refused. But Graham mounted a
proxy
ght and was elected to the board. Northern Pipe
capitulated, liquidated its bonds, and paid a $70-a-share dividend.
By 1929, the “Benjamin Graham Joint Account,” Graham’s
partnership, had $2.5 million of capital, and Graham was riding
high.6 By then, of course, Wall Street was full of rich men.
Speculators were driving prices to the moon. That very year, the
unfortunate Professor Irving Fisher of Yale proclaimed: “Stock
prices have reached what looks like a permanently high plateau.”7
Graham, though, was careful. When the Crash came, the Joint
Account lost a tolerable 20 percent. In 1930, Graham—like so
many—was convinced that the worst was over. He borrowed on
margin and plunged into stocks. And then the bottom fell out. “The
singular feature of the great crash,” as John Kenneth Galbraith
observed, “was that the worst continued to worsen.”8
The smart money—the fellow who had waited out the panic—
was wiped out with the rest. By 1932, the Joint Account had fallen
70 percent. Graham was close to ruin. His family left its park-view
duplex in the Beresford for the relative austerity of a small rear
apartment in the nearby El Dorado, where space was going empty.
His wife, a dance teacher, went back to work. Graham was ready
to quit, but a relative of Jerome Newman, Graham’s partner, put
up $75,000 of capital that enabled the rm to survive.9 When

Security Analysis appeared, in 1934, its forty-year-old coauthor had
gone ve straight years without being paid.10
Graham, in the introduction, frankly acknowledged that
investing in common stocks seemed “discredited.”11 At the market’s
recent lows, a third of American industry was selling at less than
its liquidation value.12 The experts who only a few years back had
seen in Wall Street a place of unending milk and honey now
advised, as one said, that “common stocks as such are not
investments at all.”13 Gerald M. Loeb, a commentator whose
popular book The Battle for Investment Survival appeared at about
the same time as Security Analysis, held that investing for pro t
was impossible. If the Dow Jones Industrial Average could register
381.17 in 1929 and 41.22 in 1932, who was to say what “real”
value was? “I do not think anyone really knows,” he averred,
“when a particular security is ‘cheap’ or ‘dear.’ ” Instead, Loeb
counseled, “It is necessary to speculate … to foresee [the] tides.”14
Loeb stressed that the thing to watch was not the earnings of an
enterprise but the public psychology:
The importance of full consideration of popular sentiment, expectations and opinion
—and their e ect on the price of the security—cannot be overstressed.15

Yet how was one to gauge the public sentiment? The chief method
was to follow the prices of stocks themselves, to “watch the tape.”
If a stock declined it should be sold, and quickly; if it advanced, it
should be purchased. It was not enough to buy something cheap—
one must only buy “just as it starts to get dearer.”16
If Loeb failed to grasp the paradox of millions of investors each
reacting to one another and yet all trying to stay a step ahead of
the crowd, it was not lost on Graham and Dodd:
For stock speculation is largely a matter of A trying to decide what B, C and D are
likely to think—with B, C and D trying to do the same.17

Security Analysis o ered an escape from such a trap. Graham and
Dodd urged that investors pay attention not to the tape, but to the

businesses beneath the stock certi cates. By focusing on the
earnings, assets, future prospects, and so forth, one could arrive at
a notion of a company’s “intrinsic value” that was independent of
its market price.
The market, they argued, was not a “weighing machine” that
determined value precisely. Rather, it was a “voting machine,” in
which countless people registered choices that were the product
partly of reason and partly of emotion.18 At times, these choices
would be out of line with rational valuations. The trick was to
invest when prices were far below intrinsic value, and to trust in
the market’s tendency to correct.
Given that the Depression had far from run its course, it was a
remarkable time to assert one’s faith in markets. Many companies’
shares were being quoted for less than the value of their cash in the
bank.19 But Graham, a classicist, could recognize Wall Street’s
gloom as part of an all-too-human cycle:
That enormous pro ts should have turned into still more colossal losses, that new

theories should have been developed and later discredited, that unlimited optimism

should have been succeeded by the deepest despair are all in strict accord with age-old
tradition.20

Graham dissected common stocks, corporate bonds, and
speculative senior securities (what Michael Milken would call junk
bonds) as the biologist did the frog. At rst blush, then, Security
Analysis was a textbook for a profession still in the making.* But
written during the madness of 1929 and its aftermath, the book
was also a call to arms against the sins of speculation. In that
sense, it was a total break. Loeb’s speculator regarded stocks as
pieces of paper, worth however much or little the next fellow
might pay. His aim was to anticipate that next fellow, and the
fellow after that. The Graham-and-Dodd investor saw a stock as a
share of a business, whose value, over time, would correspond to
that of the entire enterprise.

It is an almost unbelievable fact that Wall Street never asks, “How much is the business
selling for?”21

That was the question Graham and Dodd proposed as a guide to
valuing stocks. It was not an exact science, but (and this was key)
one did not need exactitude—only the skill to identify the
occasional company that was priced well below its value.
To use a homely simile, it is quite possible to decide by inspection that a woman is

old enough to vote without knowing her age, or that a man is heavier than he should
be without knowing his weight.22

Left unresolved was the nagging question of what to do when a
cheap stock, after its purchase, became even cheaper. For if prices
were sometimes wrong, the authors admitted, it could take an
“inconveniently long time” for them to adjust.23
The answer appeared the year before Bu ett arrived at
Columbia. The Intelligent Investor boiled Graham’s philosophy down
to three words—“margin of safety.”24 An investor, he said, ought
to insist on a gap—a big gap—between the price he was willing to
pay and his estimate of what a stock was worth. This was identical
to leaving room for error in driving an automobile. If the margin
was great enough, the investor ought to be safe. But what if he was
not? Suppose, that is, that the stock kept dropping. Assuming that
nothing about the business had changed, Graham said, the investor
should pay no heed to the ticker, no matter how grim its tidings.
Indeed, an investor who became unduly discouraged by a market
drop and who allowed himself to be stampeded into selling at a
poor price was “perversely transforming his basic advantage into a
basic disadvantage.”25 Basic advantage? Most investors did not
know they had one. Graham explained in a parable:
Imagine that in some private business you own a small share that cost you $1,000.
One of your partners, named Mr. Market, is very obliging indeed. Every day he tells
you what he thinks your interest is worth and furthermore o ers either to buy you

out or to sell you an additional interest on that basis. Sometimes his idea of value

appears plausible.… Often, on the other hand, Mr. Market lets his enthusiasm or his
fears run away with him, and the value he proposes seems to you a little short of
silly.26

The true investor was in that very spot. He could take advantage
of the daily market quote or choose to ignore it—Mr. Market
would always return with a new one.
To Bu ett, these ideas were the Rosetta stone. He had already
run the gamut of speculative technique; he had done stock tips,
Magee charts—one system after another in the name of keeping up
with the trend. But here was an approach to investing that
absolved him from having to imitate “B, C and D”—that required
only the sweet independence that he had learned from his father.
Bu ett experienced it as a revelation, “like Paul on the road to
Damascus.”27 Quite simply, he had found his idol.
At Columbia, Bu ett found that Graham was personally
captivating. He looked a good deal like Edward G. Robinson, and
his lectures had an air of drama. In one class, Graham depicted the
vastly di erent balance sheets of Company A and Company B. It
turned out that each was Boeing—at an up and down moment in
the aircraft manufacturer’s history.28
Graham had twenty students in 1950. Most were a good deal
older than Bu ett, and some were already working on Wall Street.
But, almost comically, the lecture devolved into a two-way
seminar.29 Graham, who used the Socratic style, would pose a
question, and even before he had the words out of his mouth the
twenty-year-old from Omaha would shoot his hand skyward.
Graham would rarely say yes or no to Bu ett’s answer. He
wouldn’t wrap the universe in a ball. It was more like: “That’s
interesting. What line of thought brought you to that conclusion?”30
And Bu ett would run with it. As recalled by Jack Alexander, a
Bu ett classmate:
Warren was probably the youngest person in the class—de nitely the precocious

pupil. He had all the answers, he was raising his hand, he was leading the discussions.
He had tremendous enthusiasm. He always had more to say than anyone else.

Graham’s accent was on cheap stocks—“cigar butts,” or stocks
that one could pick up almost for free, like spent cigars, and that
might have a couple of valuable “pu s” left in them. One of his
assignments that year was to research the performance of shares
trading for less than $5.31
Bu ett also learned the details of reading a nancial statement,
and how to spot a fraud. In essence, Graham taught him how to
get from a company’s published material to a fair value for its
securities.
But he didn’t do it in merely a theoretical way. Graham lectured
about live stocks. He was quite indi erent to the fact that students
were pro ting from his ideas. By 1950, the fty-six-year-old
Graham was prosperous, but his attitude had been no di erent in
the 1930s.
“These smart Wall Street guys,” one of his students recalled,
“they’d all go out and make a lot of money o Ben and he didn’t
seem to mind.”32 Graham was the sort of absentminded
theoretician who would sleep with a notepad by his pillow—and
then come to work in shoes of di erent colors. Marshall Weinberg,
Bu ett’s contemporary and later his broker and friend, took
Graham’s course twice. He recalled:
He was giving you ideas. Youngstown Sheet & Tube I bought at 34 … and sold between
75 and 80. I bought GM on his recommendation, also Easy Washing Machine. He’d say,
“This is a stock that looks cheap to me”—now, this morning. Real Silk Hosiery was
another stock. The class paid for my degree.

Bu ett was fanatical about following in Graham’s footsteps. He
invested in stocks held by Graham-Newman Corp., Graham’s
investment company, such as Marshall Wells and Timely Clothes.33
He also looked up his professor in Who’s Who and discovered that
Graham was chairman of the Government Employees Insurance
Company. GEICO, as the company was known, was based in
Washington. Bu ett felt that anything that Graham was chairman
of he wanted to know about, so he decided to pay a visit.34
Conveniently enough, Warren’s father had been reelected to

Congress in 1950, and was back in Washington by the spring of
1951, during Warren’s second term at Columbia.
Bu ett took the train on a Saturday. Downtown Washington was
desolate, but he went straight to GEICO’s o ces, on 15th and K
streets. Finding the door locked, he banged until a janitor
appeared.
“Is there anybody here I can talk to besides you?” Bu ett
queried.35 The janitor said there was a man working on the sixth
oor, and agreed to take him there. Lorimer Davidson was taken
aback to see a youngish student hovering at his desk—and stunned
when he started peppering Davidson with questions. But the two of
them talked for four hours.
After we talked for fteen minutes I knew I was talking to an extraordinary man. He
asked searching and highly intelligent questions. What was GEICO? What was its
method of doing business, its outlook, its growth potential? He asked the type of
questions that a good security analyst would ask. I was
was trying to nd out what I knew.

nancial vice president. He

Davidson knew plenty—about GEICO and about Graham. GEICO
had been founded in Texas in 1936 by Leo Goodwin, who had the
ingenious idea of selling automobile insurance via direct mail, thus
cutting out the usual network of agents. Also, GEICO sold policies
only to government employees, a group with fewer than average
claims. Its one-two punch of low distribution costs and superior
policyholders made it a winner. In 1947, the majority owner
wanted to cash out, and he hired Davidson—then an investment
broker—to sell it. At rst, no one took the bait. Then, in 1948, he
shopped it to Graham, who saw that it was a gold mine. GrahamNewman immediately put up $720,000—one-quarter of its assets—
for a half-ownership in GEICO. Shortly thereafter, GrahamNewman divested its GEICO stock to its shareholders, and GEICO
stock began to trade publicly. Davidson, meanwhile, had done such
a good sales job that he had convinced himself and gone to work
for GEICO.

Bu ett returned to New York enamored with GEICO. With a
little research, he discovered that its pro t margins were ve times
that of the average insurer, and that its premiums and pro ts were
soaring.36 Then he went to see insurance experts—the B, C, and D
of the day. Every one told him that GEICO’s stock was overpriced.
Bu ett’s reading of the facts was just the opposite, but he found
them daunting.37 They were experts; he was in B-school.
Every stockpicker worth his salt eventually comes to such a
crossroads. It is extremely di cult to commit one’s capital in the
face of ridicule—and this is why Graham was invaluable. He liked
to say, “You are neither right nor wrong because the crowd disagrees
with you.”38 Picking a stock depended not on the whim of the
crowd, but on the facts. And Bu ett took this to heart, partly
because he saw Graham in idealized terms—as a “hero,” like his
father.39
Graham had a similar e ect on others. Though generally
reserved, he had an almost parental fondness for his students.40 To
Jack Alexander, Graham was “almost like a father gure.” In a
way, it was a curious description—more likely to have been
uttered by a student than by one of Graham’s o spring.
With his own family, Graham was remote, a condition
exacerbated by his roving eye. He left his rst wife for a young
model, and by the time Bu ett met him, Graham was on wife
number three, his former secretary, Estelle. In an incident telling
of Graham’s disregard for convention, the professor was lying in
bed with Estelle one morning when a just-married young woman
came calling. Graham suggested that she hop in with them.
Graham’s children found him distant, especially after he lost a
nine-year-old son.41 They knew him as a gure of ideas, strolling
around Central Park with a hat and walking stick, reciting poetry.
His son Benjamin, Jr., once asked him a simple question from high
school Latin, and Graham responded by reciting an oration of
Cicero’s from memory, as if giving a lecture. He lacked the
patience for small talk, and would often disappear to read in the
middle of his own dinner parties.

But to be Graham’s student in the 1950s was to inhabit a special
place. Wall Street was lined with cigar butts; one needed only the
tools, and the cast of mind, to spot them. For the would-be money
manager, the Columbia of Graham and Dodd produced a kinetic
and communal surge, akin to the jolt that a young writer of the
twenties might have experienced at a table at the Café des
Amateurs in Paris, within earshot of Hemingway.
Bu ett quickly fell in with a nucleus of Graham stalwarts. He
went home with Fred Stanback, a retiring classmate from North
Carolina, who reported to his mother that Bu ett “just eats
hamburgers and drinks Pepsi-Colas” and hence would be no
trouble. Then Bu ett and Stanback went to Jersey City for the
annual meeting of Marshall Wells, and there met Walter Schloss, a
devotee who was working for Graham-Newman. The three went to
lunch and talked stocks to the point of exhaustion.
On another excursion, to the downtown Wall Street Club, Bu ett
met Tom Knapp, an unassuming Long Islander who had switched
from chemistry to stocks after taking a night class with David
Dodd. Bu ett also became close to William Ruane, an earnest
Harvard Business School graduate who was auditing Graham’s
class. Right o the bat, these students were united by their burning
devotion to Graham. As Bu ett would observe later, people either
took to Graham right away or not at all.42 For people of a certain
temperament, no amount of persuasion worked. Bu ett’s new pals
were hooked immediately. They found the Graham strategy—in a
nutshell, trying to buy $1 worth of securities for fty cents—
powerful and absurdly simple, whereas most of Wall Street seemed
like shooting craps. They had the beginnings of tribe, and they
gravitated to Bu ett, who was witty, likable, and—they knew—a
step ahead of themselves. Knapp’s rst impression was that
“Bu ett knew almost every balance sheet on the New York Stock
Exchange.”
Oddly, when Bu ett graduated, in 1951, both Graham and his
father advised him not to go into stocks. Each had the postDepression mentality of fearing a second visitation. Graham
pointed out that the Dow had traded below 200 at some point in

every year, save for the present one. Why not postpone going to
Wall Street until after the next crash, his heroes counseled, and
meanwhile get a safe job with someone like Procter & Gamble?43
It was awful advice—violating Graham’s tenet of not trying to
forecast markets. The Dow, in fact, never went under 200 again. “I
had about ten thousand bucks,” Bu ett noted later. “If I’d taken
their advice I’d probably still have about ten thousand bucks.”44
Anyway, there was no way that Bu ett was going to wait.
Having racked up the only A+ that Graham had awarded in
twenty-two years at Columbia,45 Bu ett made what seemed an
irresistible o er: to work for Graham-Newman for free.
But Graham turned him down. These were the days when Jews
were locked out of Wall Street’s gentile rms, and Graham
preferred to hold his spots for Jews.46 † (Morgan Stanley would not
hire its rst Jew until 1963.)47 It is not clear whether Bu ett
discovered Graham’s reason then or a bit later, but when he did, it
was a shocker. “It was sensitivity training for him,” one of his
friends would comment.48
It did not occur to Bu ett to look anyplace else on Wall Street—
that is, to work for someone he didn’t know. Once again, he
headed home. The Omaha National Bank o ered him work, but
Bu ett turned it down, preferring the familiar con nes of Bu ettFalk & Co., his father’s brokerage. A friend of Howard’s asked:
“Will you be known as Bu ett & Son?”
“No,” Warren cracked. “Bu ett & Father.”49
In Omaha, Bu ett began to court Susan Thompson, the daughter
of a prominent Omaha minister and psychology professor. Her
folks were friends of the Bu etts, and her father had managed one
of Howard’s campaigns. Also, Susie had roomed with Warren’s
sister Roberta at Northwestern University.
Susie had an enormous sparkling smile, round cheeks, and dark
hair that fell to a curve at the neck—somewhat resembling Betty
Boop’s. Bubbly and outgoing, on rst impression she struck many
as light-headed and even vacuous.
The truth was to the contrary. As a girl, Susie had been sickly.
She had su ered from earaches, had frequently had her ears

lanced, and had spent long stretches at home with rheumatic fever.
William and Dorothy Thompson had tried to make up for it by
showering their daughter with attention, tenderness, and physical
demonstrativeness.
She grew up, she would say, with an awareness of being
unconditionally loved.50 And having overcome illness, she was
conscious of a sensation of freedom. She felt not merely healthy,
but released from pain. She would say, “To be free of pain is a
great state of being. I learned that at a very young age.”51
By the time she reached adulthood, Susie seemed to have been
put together from all the emotional material that Warren did not
have. She took an unusual interest in reaching out to other people
—a deep interest. Instinctively empathetic, she had a soothing way
of drawing people out, especially at a level of feelings. Faith
Stewart-Gordon, a sorority sister and later proprietress of New
York’s Russian Tea Room, said:
Susie had this otherworldly side. We took the same philosophy course. After, she sent

me this book on Zen Buddhism. She was always trying to get past the mundane and
get to the big issues. She’d look into my eyes and say, “How are you?” When Susie
said that, she meant: “How are you doing in life? How is your soul?”

In particular, Susie had a fascination with death. But it was the
mirror image of Warren’s obsession. Somewhere in her illnesses,
Susie had lost the fear of dying, and now she was eager to be with
people on their deathbeds and to ease their fears of passing on.
Whereas Warren thought about dying logically and wanted to keep
the whole terrifying subject as far away as possible, Susie related
to death in spiritual terms and was eager to wrap her hands
around it.
Once he started seeing Susie, in the summer of 1951, Warren
immediately fell in love with her. But Susie was anything but in
love with him. She was bored by his brainteasers and would slip
out the back door when Warren came calling. He told her that he
would be rich, which did not mean a thing to her. Besides, as Susie

recalled, she was “madly in love with somebody else.” So Warren
settled for courting Susie’s father. According to Susie, Warren
went over to my parents’ home every night and played the ukulele. My father [had]

played the mandolin since he was 20, so he was really excited about having someone
to play with. So Warren did that every night, while I went out with this other
person.52

The “other person” was Milton Brown, a Union Paci c mail
handler’s son who had dated her in high school and also at
Northwestern. Susie’s parents objected to her dating a Jew and
wouldn’t invite Brown into the house.53 The cash-strapped Brown
wasn’t welcome at Susie’s sorority, either. To Susie, who was trying
to break out of her sheltered, Waspish upbringing, this magni ed
Brown’s appeal. But eventually, she gave in to her father, broke o
with Brown, and hastily left Northwestern. 54
Warren, meanwhile, was canny enough to see what was going
on. He told “Doc” Thompson that he was the perfect compromise:
“Jewish enough to suit Susie, and Christian enough to suit you.”55
By Jewish enough for Susie, Warren surely meant that Susie would
nd plenty in him to empathize with, too. Susie’s sister, Dorothy,
recalled:
My dad liked him right away. He’d come over after the family had dinner. She’d be
doing the dishes and he’d be sitting on a stool and playing a ukulele or a little guitar
and singing. Warren had a very nice voice.

The black-haired minister, who was used to getting his way, kept
telling Susie that she ought to go out with Warren. And Susie
looked up to her father and respected his judgment.
Eventually, she and Warren began to date. She liked his sense of
humor, and their Pat-and-Dick courtship blossomed into romance.
“They were so infatuated with each other,” said Warren’s Aunt
Katie. “Kissing, sitting on each other’s laps. It was awful.”
Warren, as he had predicted, was indeed “Jewish enough” for
Susie. He had his buried childhood traumas, such as his tormenting

mother and his forced removal to Washington, just waiting for
Susie to go to work on. And Susie had a depth of understanding
that was unlike anyone’s in his experience. In retrospect, Warren
said he had been lonely until he met her.56
Hidden behind an illusion veil and a gown of Chantilly lace,
Susie married Warren at Dundee Presbyterian on the third
Saturday in April 1952. Driving to California for a honeymoon,
they stopped at the Wigwam Café, outside of Omaha, for their rst
meal. According to one account—perhaps apocryphal—of the trip,
on the rst Sunday, Warren noticed a lone Cadillac parked outside
a company headquarters. He stopped the car, ducked inside, and
picked the brain of the company president while his nineteen-yearold bride waited in the car, re ecting on the verities of being
married to Warren Bu ett.
The Bu etts started out in a $65-a-month three-room apartment.57
Given Warren’s promises of riches, Susie may have been a bit
taken aback. The place was so run-down that mice crawled into
their shoes at night. Warren was so tight about money that when
the couple had a daughter—also named Susie—they made a bed for
her in a dresser drawer.
At Bu ett-Falk, Bu ett was not the sort of stock salesman one
meets very often. The rst stock he sold was a tough sale, littleknown security—GEICO. Buf Bu ett, now over his own self-doubt,
put $10,000—most of his savings—into it and pushed it on dubious
customers all over Omaha. (His Aunt Alice got him started by
buying one hundred shares.) He would cash out for a 50 percent
pro t the following year.58
What was most unusual about the young salesman was his
appetite for research. Searching for ideas, he read the heavy
purple-bound Moody’s manuals page for page with the zest of a
small boy reading comics. And he found small gems—unwanted
and very cheap cigar butts such as Kansas City Life, Genesee
Valley Gas, and Western Insurance Securities, all trading at three
times earnings or less. It seemed too good to be true; if the stocks

were so cheap, Bu ett gured, somebody ought to be buying them.
But slowly, it dawned on him. The somebody was him. Nobody was
going to tell you that Western Insurance was a steal; you had to get
there on your own.59
But Bu ett was in the wrong job. All that research was wasted
on a salesman, who stood to make the same small commission
regardless if the idea was any good or not.
And customers thought he was green. Many times, a fellow
would listen to Bu ett’s pitch, then check it out with his own, more
seasoned broker and buy it from him. Daniel Monen, a friend of
Bu ett’s in Omaha, said, “It drove Warren wild.”
Bu ett did learn a trick for getting in the door. He told Bob
Dwyer, his old golf coach, “Just let ’em feel that you can save ’em
something on taxes and nobody will keep you out.”‡
But he didn’t like persuading people to invest, particularly as he
realized that his own interest—getting a commission—was not the
same as theirs. It had an adversarial—almost a confrontational—
aspect that made him highly uncomfortable.60 Don Danly said, “I
know that he abhorred it.”
On the side, Bu ett bought a Texaco station—sort of a twentysomething version of Wilson Coin Op—and invested in real estate.
But neither worked out.61 Meanwhile, he dreamed up studies to do
for Ben Graham and suggested a couple of stocks to him—anything
to keep his chances of working for Graham alive.62
Bu ett’s biggest step at Bu ett-Falk was not an investment at
all; it was taking a Dale Carnegie course on public speaking.
Bu ett was terri ed of it, but he desperately wanted to master his
fear.
The interesting question is, why? Why would a twenty-one-yearold stockbroker have wanted to learn that skill? If Bu ett’s only
ambition was to be an investor, he would not have envisioned that
he would need to speak in public. Much less would he have
foreseen the day that he would deliver a narrative o -the-cu so
compelling, so concise, and so precisely to the point that his
audience would swear it was scripted. But to what did Bu ett
aspire—aside from being a stockpicker—that prompted him to try?

After the Carnegie course, Bu ett polished his skills by teaching
a night class—“Investment Principles”—at the University of
Omaha. The students were in their thirties and forties, and many
of them were doctors. When the skinny, open-collared twenty-oneyear-old teacher walked in, the doctors snickered.63
Bu ett immediately began to talk about Graham. “After he
talked for ve minutes you were sold,” said Leland Olson, an
obstetrician. “And he wasn’t selling. He was laid back.”
Bu ett, who taught several terms, based the lectures on The
Intelligent Investor. But now and then he would spice the class with
a homey story or word of wisdom, phrasing it simply and pacing it
to perfection.
I will tell you the secret of getting rich on Wall Street. [Pause.] Close the doors. You

try to be greedy when others are fearful and you try to be very fearful when others are
greedy.§

When Bu ett lectured, he would stand behind the desk and
awkwardly bend his right arm, so that his elbow was at his hip and
his hand was at his cheek, as if he were holding the phone. Then
he’d take his left arm and hold the right elbow, as if to make sure it
didn’t fall o . And he would stare above his pupils’ heads, as if he
were afraid to make eye contact.
Yet he spoke with such an obvious fervor that the students were
spellbound. Elizabeth Zahn, a Spanish teacher who enrolled with
her husband, an IBM salesman, in 1953, was so struck by Bu ett’s
manner that she made detailed descriptions of his every gesture. In
particular, Zahn was puzzled by a seeming contradiction. Bu ett
was very “low-gear,” but at the same time, he was intensely
committed to what he was saying. His informal manner was set o
by a focused quality that was other than casual. “Even in low gear,
I was mesmerized by him,” Zahn recalled.
When he got deep into a thought, he would pace the room, shyly
keeping his head down, and just as Zahn was afraid he’d bump
into the wall he’d reverse course and do it again the other way.
And nothing could distract him. Bu ett would go from one point to

the next, railroad-track straight, as if he had a blueprint of the
lecture pasted to his brain.
Unlike Graham, Bu ett would not give stock tips. The students
would try to get one, indirectly. They would ask about a company
with seeming casualness, but Bu ett would just laugh them o .
Zahn even read aloud a plaintive ballad:
Biz-whiz counselor
This is our cry
Why oh why won’t you tell us what YOU buy?

Bu ett laughed—but no dice. The young salesman actually
advised the class not to take tips from brokers. He said they
weren’t to be trusted.64 The entire subject of sharing information
touched a nerve, as though he considered it fraught with the
potential for abuse on either side. He regarded the majority of tips
as a waste, which is why brokers passed them along. But good
ideas—his ideas—he treated as intensely private. He regarded them
as his creation—as a tiny bit sacred.
Howard Bu ett, who had retired from the House in 1952,
thought his son was an honest broker, and admired him for it.65
According to Herbert Davis, a colleague, “Howard was proud of
Warren long before he had a record to be proud of. He talked
about him all the time, and with great a ection.” And Warren was
extremely loyal to his father.
In 1954, a Nebraska U.S. Senate seat opened up due to the death
of Senator Hugh Butler, and Howard—who very much wanted to
succeed him—was a front-runner for the nomination. But
moderates in the Republican Party quietly tried to stop him. The
matter came down to the party’s state central committee, which
met with an air of intrigue at the Cornhusker Hotel, a GOP
watering hole in Lincoln.
According to Warren’s sister Doris, Warren secretly went to the
Cornhusker to support their dad and overheard the painful news
that Howard had been beaten by Roman Hruska, a moderate.‖

Doris said, “He went down there to help our father. He overheard
them in the co ee shop. He came back and said, ‘Daddy’s throat
was slit from ear to ear.’ ”66
As far as others recalled, Warren didn’t mention it. His father
had been crushed, and Warren had been crushed with him. But like
his father, Warren kept it buried. And then, just as Howard’s dream
was squashed, Warren’s was realized. Ben Graham called and said
the religious barrier had been dropped67—and o ered Bu ett a job.
Without bothering to ask his salary (it turned out to be $12,000 a
year), Bu ett was on the next plane.68
The Wall Street that greeted Bu ett had been in a time warp. The
old men who ran it lived in fear of another Depression. The
younger men had never arrived. Of the most recent graduates of
the Harvard Business School, merely 2.9 percent had gone to Wall
Street. The new generation considered it unglamorous. Outside its
gargoyled stone fortresses, black limousines waited for men with
weary memories. Inside, it was masculine, aging, and unchanged
by technology. At Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Beane,
customers’ orders were borne on tiny slips of paper, which were
dropped onto conveyor belts to “ride jauntily on to [their]
appointment with destiny.”69
The country, it is true, was prospering, and the Dow Industrials
had topped 380. But caution was the watchword. The last time that
stocks had been so high had been 1929. It was hardly necessary to
remind people such as Graham what had happened then. He was so
wary of what he termed the “new speculation” that he kept handy
a set of Moody’s manuals from 1914—as if anything more recent
were suspect.70
Graham-Newman was located in the Chanin Building, on 42nd
Street. It had a stock ticker sitting beneath a glass bubble, making
a perpetual clicking. Bu ett, one of a half-dozen employees, shared
a small room with Walter Schloss, and later with Tom Knapp. He
wore a gray cloth jacket, like the others, and spent his time as they

did, perusing the Standard & Poor’s Stock Guide for companies.
According to Knapp, Bu ett
felt very con dent right from the start. I think his father o ered to give him, or lend
him, some money. He said no. He wanted to make a record starting from zero. And he
wanted to make a very clean type of income. A couple of times I remember saying,

“Gee, Warren, this thing isn’t reported” [to the government]. And he said, “I’m putting
it in.”

Graham-Newman, a mutual fund, bought stocks according to a
few select techniques. Graham’s favorite was to hunt for stocks that
traded at one-third less than their net working capital—in other
words, stocks that were insanely cheap.a When Bu ett or another
associate found such a stock, he would take it to Graham. (The
associates did their best to avoid Jerry Newman, Graham’s partner,
who was as nasty as Graham was sweet.) And Graham would
decide on the spot whether to buy it. It wasn’t a matter of
persuading Graham. A stock either met his criteria or it didn’t. He
did it by the numbers.
Bu ett’s trouble was that he could nd more stocks than he could
sell. He went through the S&P guide—for him, a grown-up version
of One Thousand Ways to Make $1,000—like a buzz saw. He
seemed to be bursting to replicate Graham’s entire oeuvre.
One time, a broker in Philadelphia o ered him an obscure
insurance stock known as Home Protective, at 15 a share. There
was no published material on it, and hence no way of valuing it.
But Bu ett went to the state insurance o ce, in Harrisburg, and
dug up some numbers. What he saw convinced him that Home
Protective was a steal. However, Jerry Newman rejected it. So
Bu ett and Knapp bought it for their own accounts. A bit later,
Home Protective went winging up to 70.71
Bu ett also found a block of Union Street Railway of New
Bedford, Massachusetts, which was trading at 45 and had $120 a
share in cash alone.72 Bu ett couldn’t believe his luck—but Graham
wasn’t convinced. Once again, Bu ett bought it for himself.73

Still, Bu ett managed a coup in his rst year on the job. In 1954,
Rockwood & Co., a Brooklyn chocolate concern, o ered to redeem
some of its stock in exchange for cocoa beans, of which it had a
large inventory. Bu ett deduced that trading the stock for beans
and simultaneously selling beans on the commodities market—
where the price had soared—would produce a huge pro t. As he
later described it:
For several weeks I busily bought shares, sold beans, and made periodic stops at
Schroeder Trust to exchange stock certi cates for warehouse receipts. The pro ts
were good and my only expense was subway tokens.74

Such a trade, taking advantage of price discrepancies in separate
markets, is known as arbitrage. Arbitrage was a staple in the
Graham-Newman playbook—but Bu ett was a couple of subway
stops ahead in terms of spotting the application.
In fact, Bu ett was quicker at everything. Graham would amaze
the sta with his ability to scan a page with columns of gures and
pick out an error. But Bu ett was faster at it. Howard Newman,
Jerry Newman’s son, who also worked there, said, “Warren was
brilliant and self-e acing. He was Graham exponential.”
Warren and Susie had rented a garden apartment in White
Plains, a suburb. As in Omaha, Warren was watching his pennies.
Not long after they arrived, they had a son—christened Howard
Graham. Though Warren was making a good living now, he
borrowed a crib for him.75
Within their circle of young Wall Street couples, Warren and
Susie, for di erent reasons, were both causing a stir. Roxanne
Brandt, whose husband, Henry, was a stockbroker, said:
They were di erent from the other young people we knew. They were simpler, or at
least they seemed that way. Susie was very interested in why I had not had any
children. She drew me out.

Compared to the sti , Brooks Brothers culture of the fties, Warren
and Susie were noticeably less formal. At a dinner at the Bu etts’,

after young Howie had begun to crawl, Roxanne Brandt had a
sense of “kids and toys all over the place.” The Bu ett children
weren’t “put away” like children at Manhattan dinner parties; they
were part of the evening.
What interested Henry Brandt, who had graduated at the top of
his Harvard Business School class, was that Bu ett knew more
about stocks than anyone. And he explained them so simply and
unassumingly. When the Brandts entertained the Bu etts and other
Wall Street couples, the group would settle into a curious ritual.
After dinner, the men would go into the den and Bu ett would
nestle into a comfortable black-and-white-tweed club chair with
sturdy armrests. And the other men, who were older than Bu ett,
would sit on the oor and listen to Bu ett talk—demurely
explaining the universe, just as he had at fraternity parties.
Roxanne Brandt called them “Jesus and the apostles.”
Graham thought that Bu ett was the cream of his disciples76 and
recognized a similarity between them. One day, as they were going
to lunch at a delicatessen near the o ce, Graham said, “Money
won’t make any di erence to you and me, Warren. We’ll be the
same. Our wives will just live better.”77
Graham was a thoughtful boss, and got Bu ett a movie camera
and a projector when his son was born—a generous gift for an
employee of only a few months.78 On Graham’s own birthday, he
would give out presents to the employees, guring that he was the
lucky one to have been born.79
But Bu ett doesn’t seem to have worked as closely with Graham
as he had hoped.80 In Bu ett’s words, Graham “had this kind of
shell around him. Everybody liked him. Everybody admired him
[and] enjoyed being around him … but nobody got close.”81 The
same could have been said of Bu ett.
In any case, Bu ett was frustrated at Graham-Newman. The fund
had only $5 million in capital, which didn’t leave room for many
investments. The partners also ran a private fund, Newman &
Graham, but between the two operations, the o ce was managing
only $12 million—a very small sum even then.82 And Graham was

so nervous about the stock market that he asked the partners of
Newman & Graham to withdraw some of their capital.
In short, Bu ett’s opportunities were limited. At one point, he
told Bob Dwyer, his high school golf coach, that he was learning a
lot, but also that Graham was “sitting on $4 million, trying to
decide when to get back in the market.” It was hardly how Bu ett
wanted to start his career.
Ironically, shares of Graham-Newman were in such demand that
they traded at a $200 premium to the portfolio value, roughly
$1,200. (Many people bought a single share just to see the
portfolio.) Had he wanted to, Graham could have turned his
operation into a big business. But Graham’s rst goal was never to
make money—it was to avoid losing any.
Because of his conservatism, he refused to analyze companies
subjectively, preferring to stick to his mathematical guidelines.
According to Irving Kahn, an assistant to Graham, when anyone
tried to talk to Graham about a company’s products, “Ben would
look out the window and get bored.”
Kahn said Bu ett and Graham “argued on this”—a phrase that
rings of overstatement, given the temperament of each. But their
di erences were real. Bu ett was interested in what made one
business better than another and wanted to pursue it. But Graham,
who mistrusted corporate managements, discouraged Bu ett from
visiting companies.83 And his formulaic approach cost him.
Walter Schloss tried to get him to buy Haloid, a humdrum
photographic business that owned the rights to a technology
known as xerography. The stock was at $21, of which Haloid’s
ongoing business accounted for about $17. Thus, Schloss gured
that for $4 you could take a ier on the Xerox machine. But
Graham wasn’t interested in any speculation. He said, “Walter, it’s
not cheap enough.”84
When the market roared ahead, Graham grew more nervous still.
In 1955, the Dow hit 420—10 percent above the high of 1929.
There was no reason, a quarter century having passed, why it
should not have risen. But the old-timers kept looking back to
1929. Congress was so unnerved by the prospect of a bust that it

scheduled hearings. John Kenneth Galbraith went before the
Senate Banking Committee in March with proofs of his
forthcoming study of 1929, The Great Crash—which shocked the
market into a sharp one-day swoon. Was the next crash on its
way?
No one knew, but the real purpose of the hearings was not the
stated one; it was the desire, recurring in politicians, to get to the
bottom of Wall Street. From the time of J. P. Morgan, Sr., each
generation had summoned the priests of nance to Washington.
When Graham appeared, J. William Fulbright, the committee
chairman, was all too cognizant that he had the era’s preeminent
stockpicker on the stand. Eager to unearth his secrets, Fulbright
inquired about every aspect of the trade. At times, he sounded like
a man about to call his broker.
Mr. Graham, in connection with your own
THE CHAIRMAN

:

company … How do you determine whether a
special situation is undervalued or not?85

Graham patiently took the senator to school. At one point, when
Graham voiced skepticism of stock options, Fulbright tried to
atter him.
THE CHAIRMAN

:

I agree with your views quite often.
Senator, I have no intention of shaping my

MR. GRAHAM

:

views with the expectation of your
agreement.

Finally, Fulbright got to the heart.
MR. CHAIRMAN

:

One other question and I will desist. When

you nd a special situation and you decide,
just for illustration, that you can buy for 10
and it is worth 30, and you take a position,
and then you cannot realize it until a lot of
other people decide it is worth 30, how is that
process brought about—by advertising, or
what happens?
Rephrasing: What caused a cheap stock to nd its value?
That is one of the mysteries of our business,
and it is a mystery to me as well as to
MR

. GRAHAM :

everybody else. [But] we know from
experience that eventually the market catches
up with value.

However elliptical, his answer was the basis for Bu ett’s career.
Stocks would rise to value; therefore, an investor who trusted his
judgment could be patient.
But Graham himself no longer cared. In 1956, a year after the
hearings, he retired to Beverly Hills, to teach at the University of
California at Los Angeles and pursue a life of nancial writing,
skiing, and the classics, accompanied by his wife, and also by a
French mistress. He gave much of his money to charity and o ered
that anyone who died with more than $1 million to his name was a
fool.86
Graham-Newman’s record had been very good, if not
spectacular. Over its twenty-one-year life (1936–1956) it had
earned an average of nearly 17 percent a year, compared to just
under 14 percent for the Standard & Poor’s index. The gure,
though, does not include what was easily its best investment, its

GEICO shares, which were distributed to Graham-Newman’s
stockholders. Investors who kept their GEICO through 1956 did
twice as well as the S&P 500.87
But Bu ett, quietly investing on his own, had done better. Since
leaving college in 1950, Bu ett had boosted his personal capital
from $9,800 to $140,000.88 And now that he had a kitty, he was
eager to go “home”—to Omaha—yet again. Standing on the train
platform surrounded by a sea of New York commuters didn’t seem
like a life to him.89
In the spring of 1956, he and Susie rented a house on
Underwood Avenue, two blocks from the Bu ett grocery. This time,
Bu ett had no thought of Working for anyone else. On May 1—
virtually as he arrived in Omaha—he organized a pool for family
and friends. Seven limited partners—sister Doris and her husband,
Aunt Alice, Doc Thompson, his ex-roommate Chuck Peterson and
his mother, and Dan Monen, his lawyer—put up $105,000. Bu ett,
the general partner, put in $100. It was a minuscule sum, but
Bu ett was running money not for his father or for Ben Graham,
but for a partnership of his own: Bu ett Associates, Ltd.
Around that time, Homer Dodge, a physicist and GrahamNewman investor, asked Graham the question that had occurred to
not a few of his investors: “Who will carry your mantle?” Graham
suggested Warren Bu ett. When Dodge was driving west for a
summer vacation, he stopped in Omaha, a canoe strapped to his
car. He had a brief chat with Bu ett and left for the great outdoors
—having agreed to put in $120,000.90
Bu ett now had three tiny partnerships, which he ran from his
bedroom. And he had begun to envision that his family pool might
become something more. In August, he returned to New York for
the nal stockholders’ meeting of Graham-Newman Corp. He
mentioned to Ed Anderson, another Graham disciple, that he was
thinking of setting up a partnership along Graham’s model—
maybe with a $50,000 minimum. Yet who was to say if he could
carry Graham’s torch? As the stockholders formally voted GrahamNewman out of existence, an investor named Lou Green o ered an
ironic eulogy. Green, the head of a Manhattan brokerage, averred

that Graham had made “one big mistake”—that of failing to
develop talent. Laying it on the line, Green elaborated: “GrahamNewman can’t continue because the only guy they have to run it is
this kid named Warren Bu ett. And who’d want to ride with
him?”91
* The New York Society of Security Analysts was established three years later, in 1937.
Graham was a cofounder.

† In later public comments, Bu ett shielded Graham. He liked to joke that after he had
volunteered, “Ben made his customary calculation of value to price and said no.”

‡ He wasn’t blu ng. After he left Wharton, Bu ett had lunch with Rep. Jasper Bell, the
father of his friend in Washington. The congressman said Bu ett “knew more about tax law
than any lawyer in the country.”

§ This excerpt is from an o -the-cu
lectures were not taped.

talk to Capital Cities/ABC, in 1987. His classroom

‖ Howard had vili ed Eisenhower in the 1952 primaries and backed Ike’s right-wing
opponent, Robert Taft. The then Nebaraska governor, Robert Crosby, later recalled: “The
party was badly split between Eisenhower and Taft. Bu ett was in the conservative wing. I
was in the moderate wing. When Hugh Butler died, there was a big

ght in the central

committee—my recollection is, at some room of the old Cornhusker Hotel. I was on the
telephone to my close political friends. I got them geared up to do what they could for
Roman Hruska. I felt—why not be brutally frank?—Roman was a close friend.”

a Net working capital is the total of current assets such as cash, inventory, and receivables
(but not including plant and equipment) after deducting all liabilities.

Chapter 4

BEGINNINGS

A series of market decisions does add up, believe it or not, to a kind of

personality portrait

ADAM SMITH, THE MONEY GAME

With the partnerships up and running, Bu ett was troubled by a
seemingly bizarre concern. As he wrote to “Big Boy” (Jerry Orans),
he was afraid that his estate would eventually be so big that the
money might spoil his children. He couldn’t gure out “the logical
thing to do with the dough.”
This is no problem now but viewing things optimistically it may become one and my
thinking produces no results. I am sure I don’t want to leave a barrel of money to my

kids, unless I do it at an elderly age when I have time to see what the tree has

produced. However, how much to leave them, what to do with the balance, etc.
bothers me considerably.1

Bu ett was twenty-six. He had modest savings and no steady
income. Another young man fretting over his unearned millions
might be worthy of a snicker, yet in Bu ett there was no hint of
bravado. He knew, as much as anyone can, that he would be rich—

not just successful, but rich enough to have trouble guring out
what to do with it all. He had anxiety over spending his “dough”—
before, indeed, he had any—but not over making it.
At a time when his accomplishments were modest, Bu ett’s
awesome self-con dence was the thing that propelled him. In
1957, he was managing a mere $300,000 for just a few relatives
and friends. If he was ever to be more than a quiet stockpicker in
Omaha, Bu ett would need capital, and lots of it. And if Bu ett was
to raise capital, what was there—besides that yawning selfassuredness—that would induce investors to trust him?
Bu ett had no track record as an independent operator. He had
nothing, on paper, to indicate that he was worthy of people’s trust.
And he did not want mere discretion over people’s money, he
wanted absolute control over it. He wanted no one to answer to for
his decisions on stocks—no wary customers as at Bu ett-Falk, no
skeptical bosses as at Graham-Newman.
By now, Bu ett was familiar with virtually every stock and bond
in existence. Line for line, he had soaked up the nancial pages
and the Moody’s books; day after day, he had built up a mental
portrait of Wall Street. He could measure each stone against the
skyline, and there was no one else whose analysis he trusted better
than his own.
Writing to Orans, he could critique the leading mutual funds,
dispense advice on Treasury securities, and rip the conventional
wisdom as regards investing for capital or income in a couple of
breathless paragraphs. And all of that knowledge he focused on a
single, unrelenting purpose. When Orans wrote for advice on
mutual funds, Bu ett breezily replied:
The objectives you mention in your letter mean nothing. That is all a lot of bull put
out by the sponsors. Everyone has the same objective—to end up with more dough
than they start with a minimum of risk.2

If Bu ett’s inner con dence and clear-minded design didn’t gain
people’s trust, what would? Save for those de ning aspects of his
character, why would he even try?

In the summer of 1957, Bu ett got a call from Edwin Davis, a
prominent Omaha urologist. They had never met, but one of
Davis’s patients, a New York investment adviser named Arthur
Wiesenberger, had known Bu ett in New York.3 Wiesenberger had
heard that Bu ett was trying to raise money and had suggested
that Davis call him. Though skeptical about investing with a
greenhorn, Davis agreed to have a look. On the appointed Sunday,
he gathered his family to take the young man’s measure. On rst
impression, Bu ett was startling.
The doorbell rang and in comes this guy—egad—he looked like he was eighteen. He
had very short hair, almost a butch. His collar was open, his coat was too big for him.
Everybody noticed it. He talked so very fast.4

This was an important moment for Bu ett. Dr. Davis could give
him capital and, what was more, cachet. If he could sign up the
Davises, he would not be investing merely for his parents and Aunt
Alice; he would have his foot in the door as a professional.
But Bu ett did not have the air of someone trying to please.
Indeed, some of his pitch was calculated to set the Davises on
notice. He warned them that he would disclose nothing about
where their money was invested. He would give them a yearly
summary of results, nothing more.
Also, Bu ett would be “open for business” only one day a year.
On December 31, the Davises could add or withdraw capital.
Otherwise, the money would be Bu ett’s to play with (which he
would do, he assured them, according to Graham’s principles) and
his alone. He presented this evenly, without any edge, but the
message was clear. As badly as Bu ett wanted the Davises’ capital,
he didn’t want it on any terms but his.
Then he o ered the terms. The Davises, as limited partners,
would get all of the pro ts that Bu ett could earn up to 4 percent.
They would share any remaining pro ts—75 percent to the
Davises and 25 percent to Bu ett.5 Thus, Bu ett was not asking the
Davises to gamble alone; Bu ett’s money would be on the same
horse. If his results were mediocre or worse, Bu ett would get zilch

—no salary, no fee, nada. According to Lee Seemann, the doctor’s
son-in-law, “The whole thing was laid right out. We liked that. You
knew where you stood with him.”
After Bu ett left, the Davises kicked it around. In objective
terms, they had nothing to go by. But the doctor’s wife, Dorothy,
declared, “I like everything about this young man.” Edwin Davis
put up $100,000.
By year-end, Bu ett was running ve small partnerships,
totaling in the range of $500,000. For the year, Bu ett’s rst, his
portfolios gained 10 percent, easily topping the Dow Industrials,
which su ered an 8 percent drop.*
With Susie expecting a third child and Warren seemingly on his
way, the Bu etts bought a sprawling ve-bedroom house on
Farnam Street. Warren helped his daughter bid a tender farewell to
the old house. Previously, four-year-old “little Susie” had developed
a terrifying fantasy of a bespectacled interloper, whom she
referred to as “the glasses man.” Each night, before she went to
sleep, Susie had insisted that her father check the balcony o her
room just in case the glasses man was there. Now, as they made
ready to drive away, Warren asked his daughter to step inside for
a nal look. Bending down, he said, “The glasses man is staying
here. Tell him goodbye.”
The Bu etts’ new home was a 1920s gray stucco with brown trim
—the picture of upper-middle-class suburbia. It fronted on a busy
street but was obscured by plantings. Writing to Jerry Orans,
Bu ett thought it barely worth mentioning. “Not much new out
here. As I may have mentioned I picked up a house.…” The aspect
that drew his attention was the expense. “Bu ett’s Folly,” he
reported, “has lots of room, both in the house and yard,” but he
hadn’t gone “overboard on price”—a reassurance that Orans
hardly needed.6 The house had cost $31,500.7
Bu ett worked o the master bedroom in a sitting area, which
his wife decorated with greenback wallpaper. Peter, their third
child, was born that year, but mentally Warren was wrapped up in
stocks and bonds. He was working virtually all the time, and

loving every minute. He said he was thinking of making money
before his feet hit the ground.8
Soon after the Bu etts moved, Tom Knapp, Bu ett’s GrahamNewman colleague, ew to Omaha and he and Bu ett drove to
Beloit, Wisconsin, to hear Graham give a speech. On the way,
Knapp happened to mention that the U.S. Post O ce was taking
its four-cent Blue Eagle stamp out of circulation. Bu ett came alive
—here was a chance to earn some greenbacks! He and Knapp
stopped at every post o ce on the drive home, “investing” in
soon-to-be-scarce Blue Eagles. Eventually, they bought $12,000
worth of stamps—all of them, alas, destined for Knapp’s mailroom.
Bu ett did better with his stocks. His partnerships soared 41
percent in 1958—inching out the Dow, which rose 39 percent. By
the end of Bu ett’s third year, the original partnership money had
doubled.
He also was gathering new investors. He signed up friends such
as Fred Stanback from Columbia, Don Danly, and Jerry Orans. He
went to neighbors and to former students. He signed up Leland
Olson, the obstetrician who had taken Bu ett’s class, and when
Olson wanted to sign up his mother, Bu ett drove his baby-blue
Volkswagen Beetle through a blinding snowstorm, arriving in ne
shape, as if he’d stepped out of a VW commercial. But Bu ett
refused to grovel or to bend his rules to get new investors.
As he was picking up steam, Jack Ringwalt, the owner of an
Omaha insurance company and a friend of Bu ett’s Aunt Alice,
called Bu ett, whom he had never met, and o ered $10,000 for the
kid to “fool around” with.
Bu ett replied that he had been counting on a big sh such as
Ringwalt for $50,000. Ringwalt thought it a most ungrateful reply,
but repeated his o er of $10,000.
Bu ett turned him down.9
Around town, Bu ett’s fast start, coupled with his unusual
gumption, was raising eyebrows. There was a luncheon at the
Blackstone, a big hotel in Omaha, at which, as one of Bu ett’s
investors recalled, “everybody was talking about Warren Bu ett.
Bob Storz was there. He was one of the biggest wheels in Omaha.

He said that young man will be broke—it’s just a new idea and
you’ll lose your money in less than a year.”
But the impression of people who met Bu ett was otherwise. It
was not so much his results as his serene self-con dence. One time
he went to a meeting of neighbors, who were hotly debating what
to do about a city proposal that would reroute tra c onto Farnam
Street. Bu ett stood up and calmly suggested that everybody ought
to forget about it. And that was it; people realized he was right
and went home. † Bu ett evoked a similar reaction from his
investors. They felt that he could see simple truths that they
themselves had missed.
Bu ett insisted on not disclosing his stocks because he was afraid
that someone would copy him—thus making it more expensive if
he wanted to buy more. He wouldn’t talk to anyone—he
maintained that he was afraid to talk in bed because his wife might
hear.10
But behind the cordon of secrecy, he was living a Graham-andDodder’s fantasy, picking up small cheap stock after small cheap
stock. His talent lay not in his range—which was narrowly focused
on investing—but in his intensity. His entire soul was focused on
that one splendid outlet, as it had been when he was a boy
delivering papers. Company after company he analyzed and
committed to memory. And when one became cheap, he pounced.
National American Fire Insurance was as obscure a company as
one could nd. An Omaha-based insurer, National American was
controlled by Howard F. Ahmanson, the banking magnate, and his
brother Hayden. The stock had been distributed to Nebraska
farmers and such in the late 1920s, and then largely forgotten. The
Ahmansons now were o ering to buy it back for $50 a share. Their
o er was cheap, but as no public market existed for the stock,
shareholders were gradually selling out.
After doing some digging in state insurance les, Bu ett realized
that it was extremely cheap, but he couldn’t nd any stock to buy.
He and his lawyer chum, Dan Monen, went to the annual meeting,
but Hayden Ahmanson curtly refused to let them see the
stockholders list. Then, as if asking a friend to spend an afternoon

hunting for golf balls, Bu ett suggested that Monen drive around
the state looking for stock. Sucked in by the Bu ett contagion,
Monen took o in a red-and-white Chevrolet for the far corners of
Nebraska, waving $100 a share at anyone he saw in rural
courthouses, banks, and the like. “It sounds corny,” Monen said
later, re ecting on his willingness to go. “Warren Bu ett is as near
to Mr. Perfect as anyone I know.” Mr. Perfect and his partner
captured 10 percent of the stock and made more than $100,000—
Bu ett’s rst big strike.11
Sanborn Map, another, illustrated Bu ett’s debt to Ben Graham.
Sanborn’s once-lucrative map business had declined; however, the
company had an investment portfolio, built up over its ush years,
worth some $65 a share. And its stock, re ecting its sagging map
business, was trading at only 45. This was a carbon copy of Northern
Pipe Line—prized by Graham for its railroad bonds. Echoing his
mentor, Bu ett bought Sanborn stock throughout 1958 and 1959.
He was trusting in Graham’s testimony: sooner or later a stock would
rise to value.
But it didn’t. The company’s directors owned merely four
hundred shares (105,000 were outstanding) and were content to let
the share price languish. In fact, while sitting on that huge
portfolio they had cut dividends ve times in eight years, though,
as Bu ett noted, it had not as yet occurred to the board to reduce
the fees to themselves.12
Following Graham page for page, Bu ett became a director and
lobbied the management to unearth the sub rosa value in its
investment portfolio. The management resisted.
In the meantime, Bu ett did not mention Sanborn to his
investors, though he did disclose that he had put 35 percent of their
assets into a single stock. But he and other dissident shareholders
continued to put the heat on. In 1960, Sanborn capitulated, and
agreed to use its portfolio to buy out stockholders. Bu ett made
roughly a 50 percent pro t. With the cat out of the bag, he wrote
to partners that Sanborn “does point up the necessity for secrecy
regarding our portfolio operations as well as the futility of
measuring our results over a short span of time.…”13

Not everyone was convinced. In the midst of the Sanborn
episode, John Train, a New York nancial writer, met Bu ett with
an idea of signing up. When Train learned that Bu ett would not
reveal his holdings, he decided not to invest.14
Bu ett also approached Donald Keough, a neighbor whose kids
often played with Bu ett’s. “Don, you’ve got a wonderful group of
children,” Bu ett said. “Have you given any thought to how you’re
going to get the kids through college?”
Keough, an up-and-coming assistant manager for a co ee
wholesaler, liked Bu ett, but he thought it strange that his
neighbor stayed in the house all day, working in his sneakers and a
T-shirt. Keough, too, turned him down.15
People who signed up intuitively grasped that Bu ett’s Garbolike loneness was part of the appeal. When Bu ett insisted on
secrecy, it was not merely to prevent leaks, but also to prevent
intrusions, and to maintain that sweet independence. He wanted
no amateur tipsters or second-guessers. For a stock to merit
investment, Bu ett had to persuade himself of it, and if he did,
what was the use of other opinions? Temperamentally, he
mistrusted advice-givers and nancial soothsayers. If the basis for
a stock was popular opinion and opinion changed, then what? He
was con dent that his own analysis would be less ckle.
Bu ett wanted only one thing from outside: capital.
In 1960, now just shy of thirty, Bu ett approached one of the
more devoted of his partners, a folksy cardiologist named William
Angle. “Doc Angle” had built a model train set for Bu ett in his
attic, and was willing to do just about anything for him. “Warren
asked if I’d be interested in getting ten doctors together to put up
$10,000 each,” Angle recalled. “So I rounded up a group from
Clarkson Hospital at a restaurant on 49th and Dodge.”
Bu ett had yet to appear in public as a money manager. But at
the restaurant—the Hilltop House—he trotted out the speaking
skills he had learned at Dale Carnegie and re ned in night school.
Silhouetted against a darkening summer sky, he poured out liquid
couplets from Benjamin Graham and Shakespeare, interspersed
with gentle self-mockery. He was done in less than an hour.

At the Clarkson co ee shop the next day, the talk was of nothing
else. An obstetrician said, “We’re not giving money to that young
man—he could leave the country.” Arthur Green, who had taken
Bu ett’s class, declared that he wasn’t investing because Bu ett
had ridiculed AT&T, which Green owned, as “an old ladies’ stock.”
“I was stupid,” Green said later. But eleven doctors decided to take
a chance on him. In Omaha, at least, Bu ett had made a big step
forward.
The next year, Bu ett bet $1 million—his biggest plunge ever—
on a company that, had they known of it, would have made the
doctors gasp. Dempster Mill Manufacturing was an eighty-year-old
windmill and farm-implement maker in Beatrice, Nebraska, ninety
miles south of Omaha. The windmill business being not exactly
another Xerox, Dempster had su ered from static sales and dismal
pro tability. Bu ett had nibbled at the stock—a cheap, typicalGraham play—a few years earlier. In 1961, he snapped up the
controlling interest, giving him 70 percent—and staking a fth of
his partnerships’ assets on it. Bu ett appointed himself the
chairman, a prophetic move (and unusual for a money manager)
that signaled an ambition to be something more than just an
investor.
Characteristically, Bu ett roped Dan Monen onto the board, too.
Every month, Bu ett and the loyal Monen would drive to Beatrice,
a dusty town in the plains, like a Quixote with his Sancho Panza.
But Bu ett couldn’t get a handle on Dempster. It needed an
overhaul, but working with the gritty details was not his forte. It
was like cleaning the fruit bins at the Bu ett store; he preferred the
numerical abstractions to the business itself.16 Each month, Bu ett
would entreat the managers to cut their overhead and trim the
inventory, and they would give it lip service and wait for him to
go back to Omaha.17 Promptly, Bu ett put the company up for
sale.18
But he did not question the Graham-like premise that had led to
its purchase. In fact, Graham’s in uence permeated the
partnerships. Aside from Dempster, the money was sprinkled
among forty stocks-cigar butts, arbitrages, workouts (such as

liquidations)—all from the Graham-Newman playbook.19 Bu ett
unashamedly aped his mentor in his letters to partners;20 he even
mimicked Graham’s shortcomings. Like his teacher, Bu ett ruled
out any and all high-technology companies as speculative. Graham
had rejected Xerox; Bu ett snubbed Control Data at $1 a share,
even though he was related (via the marriage of an uncle) to
William Norris, the computer giant’s founder, and was well aware
of the opportunity.‡
The Bu etts would visit the Grahams (staying at a very
inexpensive strip motel) a couple of times over the summer, when
the Bu ett family took a vacation in California. Bu ett would
closet himself with Graham for hours. He also struck up a
friendship with Graham’s wife Estelle.
Graham by then was spending much of his time in the quiet
company of his olive-skinned French lover, Marie Louise
Amingues, a.k.a. Malou.§ Estelle Graham was crushed by it. A poor
girl from Brooklyn, Estelle was self-educated and enamored of the
high life in Los Angeles, where she and Graham shared a box at the
Hollywood Bowl and threw lavish parties. According to Rhoda
Sarnat, a cousin of Graham’s who lived across the street, “It wasn’t
all tea and crumpets living with Ben. Just because you’re a genius
doesn’t make you the most caring person in the world.”
Bu ett treated Estelle kindly, and he enjoyed being there even
when Graham wasn’t around. Ironically, Graham’s wife became
Bu ett’s most ardent disciple. Though Graham steered others to his
prize pupil, Estelle actually invested with him. She exclaimed to
Sarnat: “This guy is really coming up; he’s totally trustworthy, and
you ought to put your oar in.”
Bu ett himself was far more taciturn. In any single year, he
knew, Mr. Market could take a nasty turn. He warned his partners:
“There are bound to be years when we are surpassed by the
Dow.”21 To shoulder the expectation of having to beat it every year
was too much. But his brief record, even including the stillunresolved Dempster, had been phenomenal. It should be
understood that in most years, most money managers do not even
match the Dow Jones Industrial Average. Over the rst ve years,

the Bu ett partnerships had left it in the dust.

PARTNERSHIPS

DOW

1957:

+10.4%

–8.4%

1958:

+40.9

+38.5

1959:

+25.9

+19.9

1960:

+22.8

–6.3

1961:

+45.9

+22.2

And the cumulative gain, after ve years:
PARTNERSHIPS

DOW

+251.0%

+74.3% 22

The last pair of gures merit a second glance. The Dow was up
three-quarters, Bu ett’s portfolios two and a half times.
Word of Bu ett’s success spread quickly in his hometown.
Acquaintances would amble over to him at Ross’s Steak House and
ask, with studied casualness, if he had any tips. Bu ett, with
perfect geniality, would advise them to take a pencil, shut their
eyes, and point it at the stock tables. He would pull into the
Omaha Country Club, in khaki pants and Hush Puppies, and older
men in golf shoes and sportswear would descend on him like
bees.23 But they wouldn’t get any honey.
Virtually every other stock man in the country chatted up ideas
with nary a second thought. Over lunch, at golf courses, on the
telephone-tens of thousands of times every day—investment
people inhaled and exhaled the name of a favored stock. And most
of their tips were forgotten days, if not moments, later, to be
supplanted by a new hot stock. But Bu ett was di erent. He was
possessive about stocks, like an artist with an un nished canvas. He

liked to tell stories of his coups in the market—but only when they
were wrapped up. And only of stocks that were on his agenda to
talk about.
People liked to listen to him, because he made business sound
transparent and did it with a sense of humor. In 1960, he invested
in Data Documents, a tiny Omaha tab card manufacturer founded
by Wayne Eves, a friend, and John Cleary, a former aide to
Bu ett’s father. Bu ett was so quick with answers that Eves and
Cleary made him chairman. Then Bu ett put Bill Ruane and Fred
Stanback, pals from Ben Graham’s class, and Robert Malott, a
friend from Chicago, on the board, too. They would y into Omaha
the night before board meetings—basically, as one said, they
wanted an excuse “to eat steak at Ross’s and talk to Bu ett for
three or four hours.”24 He was fun company.
Bu ett had an astonishing circle of cronies, who overlapped with
his investors. And he did not change gears from one to the other;
he was fetching, understated, informal, and a bit of the teacher in
either camp. He did not draw the usual line between “work” and
other activities. When he got on the links, he was focused as a cat.
Robert Billig, a golf partner, said Bu ett “could take putting
instructions better than anyone.” When Billig told him how to aim,
Bu ett shut out everything else and turned his ethereal
concentration on the golf ball. “It was amazing how often he’d
make those,” Billig marveled.
Bu ett’s passion outside of work was bridge. He had a regular
game, the members of which were a sampling of Main Street,
U.S.A.—ad executive, Buick dealer, judge, life insurance agent,
mortgage man, railroad attorney, and American Automobile
Association chapter president. Bu ett would show up with a sixpack of Pepsi-Cola and entertain the guys with a stream of jokes
and stories. He didn’t talk about the money he was making. The
point was, he didn’t have to. He played so intensely he could have
been working, only with trumps instead of with stocks and bonds.
Bu ett hated to lose. He resisted playing for high stakes,
meaning a penny a point, unless he thought his team had an edge.
But he competed just as hard at quarter-penny stakes.25

What distinguished Bu ett was the way he zoned in. He would
stare at the cards and calculate the odds like a machine. “He was
not emotional,” noted James Koley, a lawyer and occasional
partner. “It was just mathematics to him.”
Before the rst card was played, Bu ett would plan the entire
hand, stripping away the hateful aspect of chance. Kay Koetter,
the life insurance man, recalled, “Warren used to sit there and
think and think and think until he had gured out where every
card in the deck was. I brought my father once—it drove him
crazy.”
Bu ett was so consistently analytical—unusually so. On form, his
emotional pendulum did not swing as far as other people’s. There
was no pushing him to an expression of, say, anger, despondency,
recklessness, or other feeling outside of his customary Pepsidrenched high spirits. He was always logical and even-tempered,
always in the same, circumscribed arc.
Bu ett was enormously dependent on Susie. She paid the bills,
took care of the kids, ran their lives. Whatever was outside his
range, Susie handled. In particular, Susie shielded Warren from his
mother. Even as an adult, he would shake or go mute at the sight
of that aging and shriveling tormentor. He did his best to avoid
her, and at family gatherings, he would withdraw after dinner on
the pretext that he needed to nap.
One time, as Leila was leaving, she and her son passed in the
hallway. When she attempted a kiss goodbye, Warren backed
away, leaving his mom in tears. But save for such a rare chance
encounter, Susie would cover for him. Susie would talk to Leila so
that Warren wouldn’t have to.26
Warren’s need for Susie was palpable. Once, when they were
visiting his sister Doris in Washington, Susie awoke at six in the
morning with an extremely painful case of diverticulitis. En route
to the hospital, even though Susie was the critically sick one, she
was trying to comfort Warren, who had a mortal fear of hospitals
and visibly was the more distraught.27
Even on a normal day, Warren’s face would light—a touching
betrayal of his feeling—when Susie entered the room. She would

run her ngers through his hair, x his tie, sit on his lap, hug him.
She sustained him. Referring, presumably, to her soothing
explorations of his childhood, Warren once declared, “Susie
removed the thorns, one by one.”28 And Susie would speak of
Warren like a fragile child whom she was sworn to protect. She
would hint to her children that there were parts of him they didn’t
know about—that only Susie knew about.29
They were perfectly complementary—Warren, self-absorbed,
Susie, reaching out to the world. She tended to an unending stream
of con dants and solace-seekers—a friend going through a divorce,
a neighbor with a sick relative. It seemed that anyone in Omaha
who had a problem landed on Susie’s “couch.” On more than one
occasion, she became so involved in talking to a waiter or waitress
that she left the restaurant with his or her phone number.
Susie was determined to see that the Bu etts did not lead narrow
lives.30 In a trivial example, they joined a “gourmet cooking
club”—a group of couples who dined on Swedish meatballs one
month and French crêpes the next. Each time, though, Warren
would pleasantly ask the hostess to make him a hamburger.31 He
preferred to stick to the familiar: the same city, the same foods, the
same single-minded pursuit. He stuck to the arc.
At a party, the Bu etts were a study in contrasts. Susie would
work the room. She’d lean into someone with her big round eyes
and say, “Is everything okay?”32 Warren would plop himself in a
corner, “looking so young, with this cowlick sticking up, kind of
cute,” said Susie’s friend Eunice Denenberg. But people would drift
over to him. Without any apparent e ort, he would start to tell a
story, choosing the words precisely and pacing it to perfection,
“and you would look around and suddenly people were at his
feet.” School was always in with him.
Bu ett was a talker more than a conversationalist. Richard
Holland, an Omaha advertising executive, observed that even in
social settings, Bu ett had a purposeful quality. Holland met
Bu ett in the late fties, when Holland was serving on a creditors’
committee of a bankrupt client. Bu ett, who had been
recommended to manage the workout, showed up in tennis shoes

and an old shirt. “I thought maybe he was ready for bankruptcy,”
Holland said. They got to be good pals, and Holland also invested
with Bu ett. He noticed that Bu ett was not a chitchatter. “He
wanted to talk about something.” But he was awkward at small
talk, which he punctuated with a nervous chuckle.
Jane Orans, Jerry’s wife, thought Bu ett’s mind “worked
di erently.” He would pick a subject for an evening and ask
everyone what he or she thought of it, as if he were leading a
seminar. One year, about 1961, when Warren and Susie were
visiting the Oranses in New York, Bu ett spent much of the
evening arguing that overpopulation was the world’s most serious
problem. It was a typically Bu ett-like position: logical and
mathematically derived. Also, it touched on his morbid fear for
human survival. But Bu ett wasn’t confrontational about it; his
touch was much lighter. Quoting Jane Orans:
He injected it all with humor. He was very convincing, very logical, but it wasn’t
lecturing. He made you feel you had reached the same conclusion with him, though

obviously he had given it more thought. When he left you felt he had shaped the
evening, but you didn’t feel that you hadn’t enjoyed it.

Bu ett was also raising serious money in New York. The Bu etts
would visit in the spring, both to see friends and for Warren to do
business. He would ring up Orans from his hotel, usually the Plaza,
and say, “Big Boy, could you bring over a six-pack of Pepsi? You
can’t believe what room service charges!” Meanwhile, Bu ett was
collecting six- gure checks.
In part, he was feeding o the Graham network. He met
Marshall Weinberg, a broker and fellow Graham alumnus, at a
lecture at the New School. He and Weinberg became friends, and
Weinberg and his brothers invested $100,000. Henry Brandt,
another broker friend, invested and steered his clients to Bu ett.
Laurence Tisch, tipped o by Howard Newman (formerly of
Graham-Newman), was good for another $100,000.
Then there was David Strassler, a New Yorker whose family was
in the business of xing distressed companies. Strassler ew into

Omaha to look into buying Dempster, the windmill company.
Bu ett picked him up at the airport. Quoting Strassler:
I had the typical attitude of a New York guy meeting a hayseed. I had gone to Harvard
and studied at MIT. I had just nished working out some deals. I was feeling pretty

good. After we had been driving a little bit he started asking me questions about a
company in which my family had a majority interest. It was Billings & Spencer, of

Hartford. It made forgings and metal shears. Only [about 2%] of it was public. I’m still
not sure how he knew about it. Then he started asking me questions about the balance
sheet. He knew the balance sheet better than I did. That stopped me totally cold.

Strassler, the “typical” New York guy, invested on the spot.
The Bu ett partnerships, begun with a $105,100 grubstake,
entered 1962 with $7.2 million in capital—more than GrahamNewman at its peak. Of the total, $1 million belonged to Bu ett
personally. He was still small, but not unproven. And though
unknown to the general public, he was no longer obscure. The
original nucleus of seven investors had mushroomed to ninety,
grouped in clusters from California to Vermont.33
Swelling with new accounts, Bu ett decided that he had
outgrown his sitting room. He merged the partnerships into one:
Bu ett Partnership, Ltd. He quadrupled the minimum investment,
to $100,000. And he moved his o ce to Kiewit Plaza, a fourteenstory pale-green-and-white tower on Farnam Street.
Kiewit Plaza was perched at the crest of a hill on the outskirts of
Omaha’s business district, in a hybrid neighborhood with strip
shopping, apartments, and an old steel foundry. Bu ett’s building
was drably functional down to the industrial-carpeted halls—
happily drab, as Bu ett could assure his partners that he wasn’t
overspending. Indeed, from Bu ett’s point of view it was a palace.
He had a secretary and an assistant to shake him loose from
administrative details—thus, more time for Moody’s. He had space
to rent to his father, who was ailing. And the o ce was on the
same street as his home—as though he had merely tacked on a
couple of miles to the hallway linking his bedroom to his study.

Bu ett spent the day reading annual reports and business
publications and talking on the telephone. With more and more
reports to read and stocks to analyze, he was ever in good humor.
But it was rather solitary. He often lunched alone, sending out for
a cheeseburger and french fries. His tiny sta knew nothing more
of his stock picks than his wife did.
Bu ett did have an adviser away from the o ce—miles away,
where it suited him. His letters to his partners were peppered with
references to a “West Coast philosopher” friend, a nom de guerre
that only hints at this fellow’s in uence. Charlie Munger, six years
Bu ett’s senior, had also grown up in Omaha, the son of a lawyer
and grandson of a judge. He was a close family friend of Edwin
and Dorothy Davis and had worked (“slaved”) at the Bu ett store
on Saturdays.
After three years in college and a wartime stint studying
meteorology, Munger got into Harvard Law School without a
bachelor’s degree. His classmates found him brilliant and
opinionated to a fault. Called on by a professor when he was
unprepared, Munger shot back, “I haven’t read the case, but if you
give me the facts, I’ll give you the law.”34
After Harvard, Munger practiced in Los Angeles, but in 1959 he
returned to Omaha to close out his father’s practice. Edwin Davis’s
son, one of Bu ett’s investors, was struck by his likeness to Munger
and invited the two of them to lunch at the exclusive Omaha Club.
They hit it o immediately.35
“Warren, what’s your racket?” Munger inquired.
“Well, we have a partnership.”
“Maybe I could do that out in Los Angeles.”
Bu ett peered at him and said, “Yeah, I think you could.”
The next night they were reunited at Dick Holland’s, a mutual
friend’s, and talked a blue streak. Munger was clutching the same
drink the entire evening. He was so intent on babbling that as he
lifted his glass and tilted his head to swallow he would raise the
other hand in a stop sign so no one would cut him o .36
Physically, Munger was unimpressive. He had an el n face,
pasty skin, and glasses an inch thick. Though something of a snob

and highly judgmental, he had a deep sense of ethics. His smarts
were matched by a Churchillian self-assurance and joie de vivre.
Asked once if he could play the piano, Munger replied, “I don’t
know, I never tried.” Bu ett saw in him a kindred intellect and
blistering independence.
A friendship evolved over the summers, when the Bu etts went
to California. When Bu ett was home, he was constantly sprawled
on the oor cradling the phone and talking to Munger. A familiar
refrain at the Bu etts’ dinner hour, according to little Susie, was
“Oh-oh, Dad’s talking to Charlie.” She recalled, “They talked for
hours. They anticipated each other. It was like they hardly had to
say anything. It was, ‘Yeah—Uh-huh—I know what you mean—
Right.’ ”
Bu ett said he and Munger thought so much alike it was
“spooky.”37 But unlike so many of Bu ett’s friends—surely this was
part of the attraction—Munger was not in awe of him. And Bu ett
was so enamored of Munger that he urged him to adopt his own
line of work. He kept telling him that practicing law was a waste
of his talent—and Munger did not disagree.
Like Warren, I had a considerable passion to get rich. Not because I wanted Ferraris—I

wanted the independence. I desperately wanted it. I thought it was undigni ed to have

to send invoices to other people. I don’t know where I got that notion from, but I had
it. I had lived way under my income for years, saving money.

He started a law rm, Munger, Tolles & Hills, but barely
practiced there. By 1962, as Bu ett was moving into Kiewit Plaza,
Munger was running his own investment partnership.
That spring, Bu ett went to Munger with a problem: what to do
about Dempster? Munger was no Ben Graham disciple. In his view,
troubled companies, which tended to be the kind that sold at
Graham-like discounts, were not easily put right.
But Munger knew a fellow, name of Harry Bottle, who might be
the man for Dempster. Bu ett interviewed Bottle in Los Angeles,
and Bottle was on the job in Beatrice six days later. He cut costs,

closed plants, and slashed the inventory. Writing to his partners of
Bottle,‖ Bu ett announced:
Harry is unquestionably the man of the year.… He has accomplished one thing after
another that has been labeled as impossible.…38

Bottle was doing—and doing well—the dirty work that Bu ett
couldn’t do. He was squeezing cash from Dempster’s
underperforming factories, which cash Bu ett was funneling into
stocks and bonds. From Harry Bottle’s clay, Bu ett was sculpting a
wholly di erent enterprise—one with a diversi ed (and steadily
rising) portfolio of securities. This was the sort of alchemy that was
very much within Bu ett’s range. He told his partners:
To some extent, we have converted the assets from the manufacturing business which

has been a poor business, to a business which we think is a good business—
securities.39

The redeployment carried a cost. One hundred people were laid
o , and Bu ett met with heavy criticism in Beatrice.40 Bill Otis, a
bridge partner, asked him in a kidding vein, “How can you sleep at
night after ring all those people?”
To Bu ett, who had a thin skin where his reputation was
concerned, it was no joke.
“If we’d kept them the company would have gone bankrupt,” he
said. “I’ve kept close tabs and most of them are better o .”
Though this has the ring of rationalization, Bu ett hated being
called a liquidator and vowed that he would “never” lay people o
again.41
But he had no problem with the results. After a year, Dempster
was trimmer but more pro table, and it had $2 million worth of
securities to boot. In 1963, Bu ett sold it—netting the partnership
a $2.3 million pro t and nearly tripling its investment.42 Three
things had made it work: the initial bargain price, Bu ett’s
patience in holding on, and his and Bottle’s turnaround. To Bu ett

—as ardently in Ben Graham’s camp as ever—the
outweighed the rest.

rst point

This is the cornerstone of our investment philosophy: Never count on making a good
sale. Have the purchase price be so attractive that even a mediocre sale gives good
results.43

* All gures for the Dow are as Bu ett reported them to his partners—that is, adjusted to
include dividends.

† George Payne, who had organized the meeting, immediately called Bu ett and signed up for
a partnership.

‡ Bu ett would not call this a “mistake.” He would argue that since he did not have the
technical computer expertise to value Control Data, investing in it would have been a gamble.

§ Malou had previously been the companion of one of Graham’s sons, who committed
suicide.

‖ Bu ett did not hesitate to talk about a company once he had a controlling share of it.

Chapter 5

PARTNERS

I cannot promise results to partners.
WARREN BUFFETT,
LETTER TO PARTNERS, JANUARY 1963

Sol Parsow, who owned a men’s shop in Kiewit Plaza, knew
Warren Bu ett as other than a fashion plate. Typically, Bu ett
would come in and order ve suits—all, despite Parsow’s pleading,
in a dull gray—and leave on a dime.
One morning, though, Bu ett came into the store seeking a bit of
fashion advice—sort of. He wanted Parsow’s opinion of ByerRolnick, a hat manufacturer.
Parsow explained that President Kennedy’s bareheaded look was
all the rage. “Warren,” he said, “I wouldn’t touch it with a ten-foot
pole. Nobody is wearing hats anymore.”
A bit later, Bu ett returned. “Sol, what’s going on with the suit
industry?” Bu ett asked.
“Warren, it stinks. Men aren’t buying suits.”
This time, he couldn’t talk him out of it. Bu ett Partnership
bought a small stake in a New Bedford, Massachusetts, maker of
suit liners-Berkshire Hathaway, Inc.—at precisely $7.60 a share.1

In 1962, Berkshire was one more cheap stock of the sort that
appealed to Ben Graham disciples. The venerable Yankee
manufacturer had long been struggling against lower-cost Southern
and Far Eastern competitors. But on its books, at least, Berkshire
was a bargain. It had $16.50 a share of working capital—two
times its share price. As a Graham-and-Dodder, Bu ett liked the
stock and gradually added to his position.
Despite this investment, it was clear that Bu ett was becoming
more than just a carbon copy of his teacher. He was bolder than
Graham: more willing to load up on a stock or to ride a winner.
And, of course, his results had been better.
What was not so apparent was that Bu ett was also beginning
to think di erently—that is, to think in qualitative terms, as well as
in the merely numerical terms that had appealed to Graham. When
Bu ett looked at a stock, he was beginning to see not just a frozen
snapshot of assets, but a live, ongoing business with a unique set of
dynamics and potential. And in 1963, the year after he invested in
Berkshire, Bu ett began to study a stock that was unlike any he
had bought before. It had no factories and virtually no hard assets
at all. Indeed, its most valuable commodity was its name.
American Express was a company divinely suited to the time.
America had entered the space age, and its citizens were in a
futuristic frame of mind. Few products symbolized the attainment
of the modern life as aptly as those of American Express. Air travel
having become a ordable, the middle class was embarking on the
Grand Tour, and the traveler’s check had become its passport.
(“Checks That Never Bounce,” Reader’s Digest gushed.)2 Half a
billion dollars of the company’s scrip was in circulation, accepted
as readily as money itself. Of equal import, by 1963 one million
people carried the American Express card, introduced, merely ve
years earlier, in the innocent era in which citizens thought it
necessary to travel about with hard coin. Time heralded the advent
of the “cashless society.”3 A revolution was at hand, and American
Express was its beacon.
And then the bottom fell out. The trouble began, as it often will,
in a remote and seemingly minor colony of the corporate empire—

in this case, a warehouse in Bayonne, New Jersey, that was owned
by an American Express subsidiary.
The warehouse, in the normal course of its less than glamorous
trade, accepted tank loads, supposedly of vegetable oil, from an
out t known by the unwieldy moniker Allied Crude Vegetable Oil
Re ning. In return for the supposed salad oil, the warehouse issued
receipts to Allied, which used the receipts as collateral to obtain
loans. Subsequently, Allied led for bankruptcy. Creditors seized
Allied’s collateral—or rather, tried to. At this point—November
1963—American Express discovered that it had a problem:
“Subsequent investigation disclosed that the tanks contained very
little vegetable oil.”4 What they contained, in part, was seawater,
and seawater of very high quality, though not worth its weight in
salad oil. In short, the warehouse had su ered a massive fraud, by
some estimates totaling $150 million.
Who would make good the losses? The responsible party was, in
the rst instance, Allied. But Allied was broke. The American
Express subsidiary also led for bankruptcy. Whether American
Express itself had any liability was uncertain. But Howard Clark,
the chief executive, grasped that for a company with its name on
traveler’s checks, the public trust was all. Clark, to his credit,
issued a manifesto the very thought of which would have caused
lesser CEOs to shudder.
American Express Company feels morally bound to do everything it can, consistent
with its overall responsibilities, to see that such excess liabilities are satis ed.

In other words, the parent company would stand behind the
claims whether legally bound to or not. The potential loss was
“enormous.” Indeed, he said, it was “more than we had.”5
The company’s stock fell from 60 before the news to 56½ on
November 22. When markets reopened after the Kennedy
assassination, American Express tumbled to 49½.
It developed that Allied had been run by one Anthony De
Angelis, a.k.a. “the Salad Oil King.” De Angelis was a familiar type
in American nance, possessed of the combination of brilliance

and moral exibility that produces a rst-rate white-collar crook.
In a previous incarnation, he had controlled a New Jersey
meatpacker that had run afoul of the government and gone bellyup.6 When he resurfaced with Allied, a supplier of vegetable oils
for export, his record as a former bankrupt prevented him from
getting credit. Thus his canny scheme to park “salad oil” in the
American Express warehouse. Once he had receipts with that most
hallowed of corporate names, De Angelis was bankable. He
borrowed money, bet the house on vegetable oil futures, and lost.
In the scandal’s wake, the portly De Angelis was escorted from
his two-story red-brick home in the Bronx to face indictment in
federal court in Newark.* And American Express, which had not
missed a dividend payment in ninety-four years, suddenly was said
to be at risk of insolvency.
As these events were unfolding, Bu ett paid a visit to Ross’s
Steak House in Omaha, in the same inquiring spirit as when he had
earlier dropped in on the clothier Sol Parsow. On this evening,
Bu ett was interested not in the customers’ steaks, nor in their
suits or hats. He positioned himself behind the cashier, chatted with
the owner, and watched. What Bu ett observed was that, scandal
or no, Ross’s patrons were continuing to use the American Express
card to pay for their dinners.7 From this, he deduced that the same
would be true in steakhouses in St. Louis, Chicago, and
Birmingham.
Then he went to banks and travel agencies in Omaha and found
that they were doing their usual business in traveler’s checks.
Similarly, he went to supermarkets and drugstores that sold
American Express money orders. Finally, he talked to American
Express’s competitors. His sleuthing led to two conclusions, both at
odds with the prevailing wisdom:
1. American Express was not going down the tubes.
2. Its name was one of the great franchises in the world.8
American Express did not have a margin of safety in the Ben
Graham sense of the word, and it is unthinkable that Graham
would have invested in it. The Graham canon was quite clear: a
stock ought to be purchased on the basis of “simple and de nite

arithmetical reasoning from statistical data.”9 In other words, on
the basis of working capital, plant and equipment, and other
tangible assets—stu that one could measure.
But Bu ett saw a type of asset that eluded Graham: the franchise
value of American Express’s name. For franchise, think: a market
lock. The Cardinals own the franchise for baseball in St. Louis; no
other team need apply. American Express was nearly that good.
Nationally, it had 80 percent of the traveler’s check market, and a
dominant share in charge cards. In Bu ett’s opinion, nothing had
shaken it, and nothing could.10 The loyalty of its customers could
not be deduced from Graham’s “simple statistical data”; it did not
appear on the company’s balance sheet as would a tangible asset,
such as the factories of a Berkshire Hathaway. Yet there was value
in this franchise—in Bu ett’s view, immense value. American
Express had earned record pro ts in each of the past ten years.
Salad oil or not, its customers were not going away. And the stock
market was pricing the company as if they already had.
By early 1964, the shares had plunged to 35. Wall Street’s
chorus, all reading the same lyrics, was chanting, “Sell.” Bu ett
decided to buy. He put close to one-quarter of his assets on that
single stock—one with a liability of unknown and potentially huge
proportions. If Bu ett was wrong, his accumulated pro ts and
reputation stood to go up in ames.
Clark, the American Express president, o ered $60 million to the
warehouse’s creditors in an e ort to settle their claims. But he was
sued by his own shareholders, who asserted that Clark was
“wasting” their assets on a specious moral obligation.
Bu ett did not agree. He dropped in on Clark and introduced
himself as a friendly shareholder. “Bu ett was buying our stock,”
Clark recalled, “and anybody who bought it then was a pal
indeed.”
When Bu ett told Clark that he supported him, an American
Express lawyer asked if he would testify. Bu ett went to court and
said shareholders shouldn’t be suing—they ought to be
congratulating Clark for trying to put the matter behind them.11
“As far as I was concerned,” Bu ett would explain, “that $60

million was a dividend they’d mailed to the stockholders, and it got
lost in the mail. I mean, if they’d declared a $60 million dividend,
everybody wouldn’t have thought the world was going to hell.”12
Though the suits dragged on, the stock began to rise. Bu ett,
however, did not follow the Graham route of taking pro ts. He
liked Clark, and he liked the company’s products. Gradually,
Bu ett added to his position.
Berkshire Hathaway, meanwhile, was indeed going to hell. With
the market for textiles mostly poor, Berkshire was losing money
and gradually closing mills. But Bu ett continued buying its stock,
too, and the partnership won a controlling interest. As in the case
of Dempster Mill, Bu ett went on the board, hoping to set it
straight. He also was charmed by its rugged New England plant.
Despite its di culties, he reported to his partners, “Berkshire is a
delight to own.”13
Half of his portfolio now was rooted in two very di erent stocks,
which glared at each other like opposing bookends. In Bu ett’s
terminology, Berkshire’s appeal was “quantitative”—based on
price. American Express was based on a subjective view of
“qualitative” factors such as the strength of its products and
management. Though he regarded the softer methodology as the
less conclusive, Bu ett was uncertain where the balance lay. The
“main quali cation is a bargain price,” he wrote; but he also would
pay “considerable attention” to qualitative factors.14
Bu ett didn’t disclose the American Express holding to his
partners. But concurrent with his experimentation away from
Graham, he began to communicate more expansively to his
partners in his letters. He used the letters not just to report results,
but to talk about his approach and to educate his readers in a
general sense about investing. School was in.
Increasingly, the voice that emerged was not Ben Graham’s—not
phrases from The Intelligent Investor—but Bu ett’s own. It was, by
turns, articulate, droll, self-deprecating, and rather more literate
than one would expect from an investment manager in his thirties.
For a young man, he was astonishingly comfortable with himself.
Here is Bu ett at thirty-two, on “The Joys of Compounding”:

I have it from unreliable sources that the cost of the voyage Isabella originally

underwrote for Columbus was approximately $30,000. This has been considered at

least a moderately successful utilization of venture capital. Without attempting to
evaluate the psychic income derived from

nding a new hemisphere, it must be

pointed out that … the whole deal was not exactly another IBM. Figured very roughly,

the $30,000 invested at 4% compounded annually would have amounted to something
like $2,000,000,000,000 [two trillion] …15

His serious point was that even tri ing sums should be invested
with the utmost care. To Bu ett, blowing $30,000 represented the
loss not of $30,000 but of the potential for $2 trillion.
In another letter, he chided partners for being overly in uenced
in their nancial planning by the desire to avoid taxes. Indeed,
many of life’s errors were the result of people forgetting what they
were really trying to do.
What is one really trying to do in the investment world? Not pay the least taxes,

although that may be a factor to be considered in achieving the end. Means and end
should not be confused, however, and the end is to come away with the largest aftertax rate of compound.

It must be, he added, that people’s emotional distaste for paying
taxes blinded them to acting rationally—a misstep that Bu ett was
careful to avoid. “Ultimately,” he reasoned, there were only three
ways to avoid a tax: (1) to give the asset away, (2) to lose back the
gain, and (3) to die with the asset—“and that’s a little too ultimate
for me—even the zealots would have to view this ‘cure’ with mixed
emotions.”16
Bu ett returned to such thematic grace notes again and again.
Indeed, reading the letters front to back, they are full of early
sightings of later Bu ett melodies. But reading them singly, one is
more aware of the tone, and speci cally of Bu ett’s intense focus
on his own development. Written at night, when the rest of the
house was asleep, the letters have about them a quality of selfdiscovery—a pimply, self-conscious honesty. The writer of these

letters has the same engaging informality that Bu ett did in
person.
Of course, Bu ett knew many of his readers on a personal basis,
as family or friends. But the collective relationship that he had
with them as his partners—even though, in a sense, an abstract
one—had a special signi cance to him.
In person, he kept a distance, but as a general partner, Bu ett
was revealing about what was, in e ect, his most intimate
concern. If his work in the partnership amounted to a sort of selfportrait, the background motif of the letters was Bu ett’s own
character. He used these semiannual missives to prepare his
partners, and to align their expectations and thinking with his
own. He talked to them.
I am not in the business of predicting general stock market or business uctuations. If

you think I can do this, or think it is essential to an investment program, you should
not be in the partnership.17

It was enormously important to Bu ett that his partners see him
as trustworthy. He and Susie put more than 90 percent of their
personal money in with the partners’, as did Bill Scott, Bu ett’s
assistant. “So we are all eating our own cooking,” Bu ett assured
them.18
He took pains to explain his approach in advance, and in
concrete
terms—precisely
because
he
knew
that
a
misunderstanding could sunder the union. One time, a partner
barged into the reception area at Kiewit Plaza intent on nding
out where the money was invested. Bu ett, who was meeting with
a banker named Bill Brown—later chairman of the Bank of Boston
—told his secretary he was busy. She returned in a moment and
said the man insisted on seeing him. Bu ett disappeared for a
minute and then told his secretary, “Price that guy out” [of the
partnership]. Turning to Brown, Bu ett added, “They know my
rules. I’ll report to them once a year.”19
Bu ett made no attempt to predict his results, but he was
obsessed with the notion that his partners should judge him fairly

—meaning unemotionally and according to a neutral, arithmetic
scale. (That is how Bu ett judged himself.)
I believe in establishing yardsticks prior to the act; retrospectively, almost anything
can be made to look good in relation to something or other.20

His own goal, stated at the outset, was to beat the Dow by an
average of 10 points a year. On this topic, he took his readers
deeper. The Dow, he noted, was an unmanaged group of thirty
stocks. Yet most of the pros couldn’t match it. Why was it, he
wondered, that “the high priests of Wall Street,” with their brains,
training, and high pay, couldn’t top a portfolio managed by no
brains at all? He found a culprit in the tendency of managers to
confuse a conservative (i.e., reasonably priced) portfolio with one
that was merely conventional.21 It was a subtle distinction, and
bears re ection. The common approach of owning a bag full of
popular stocks—AT&T, General Electric, IBM, and so forth—
regardless of price, quali ed as the latter, but surely not as the
former. Bu ett blamed the committee process and group-think that
was prevalent on Wall Street:
My perhaps jaundiced view is that it is close to impossible for outstanding investment
management to come from a group of any size.…22

Such decision-via-consensus—then and now the rule on Wall
Street—tended to produce a sameness from one fund to the next. It
nourished the seductive syllogism “whereby average is ‘safe’ ” and
unorthodox is risky. In truth, Bu ett countered, sound reasoning
might lead to conventional acts, but often it would lead to
unorthodoxy.
In some corner of the world they are probably still holding regular meetings of the Flat
Earth Society. We derive no comfort because important people, vocal people, or great
numbers of people agree with us. Nor do we derive comfort if they don’t.23

Bu ett’s portfolio was decidedly unconventional. With his big
bets on American Express, Berkshire Hathaway, and two or three

others, the lion’s share of the pool was in just ve stocks.24 Ideally,
Bu ett would have preferred to spread his assets, provided that he
could have found, say, fty stocks that were equally “superior.”
But in the real world, he found that he had to work extremely hard
to nd just a few.25
He ridiculed the fund managers who took the opposite tack—
which is to say, most of those working on Wall Street.
Diversi cation had become an article of faith; fund managers were
commonly stu ng their portfolios with hundreds of di erent
stocks. Paraphrasing Billy Rose, Bu ett doubted that they could
intelligently select so many securities any more than a sheik could
get to “know” a harem of one hundred girls.
Anyone owning such numbers of securities … is following what I call the Noah School
of Investing—two of everything. Such investors should be piloting arks.26

A portfolio with scores of securities would be relatively
una ected if any one stock fell, but similarly una ected should an
issue rise. Indeed, as the number of stocks grew, the portfolio
would come to mimic the market averages. That would be a safe
and perhaps a reasonable goal for the novice, but in Bu ett’s view,
it undermined the very purpose of the professional investor, who
presumably was being paid to beat the average. Owning so many
stocks was an admission that one could not pick the winners.
None of this is to suggest that Bu ett was a gambler. He was just
as determined as Ben Graham had been to avoid taking a loss. But
where Graham had insisted on substantial (if not extreme)
diversi cation,27 Bu ett thought he could safeguard his eggs
without spreading them around. † Beneath his surface modesty he
was, in e ect, making a very brassy claim. And he continued to
live up to it. The partnership portfolio jumped an astonishing 39
percent in 1963 and 28 percent in 1964. By then, Bu ett was
managing $22 million. His personal net worth was close to $4
million—at that time, quite a fortune.28
This spiraling accumulation had no noticeable e ect on Bu ett’s
lifestyle. He remained partial to Parsow’s gray suits, Ross’s steaks,

and University of Nebraska football games. During the week, aside
from an occasional business trip, his X coordinate merely traversed
an alley between his home and o ce; the Y coordinate barely
moved at all. Nor was there anything in Bu ett’s manner that
suggested money. He did add some rooms and a racquetball court
to his house, the variously sloping roofs of which now seemed to
ramble disjointedly over the lot. But for a multimillionaire, it was
remarkably ordinary, and of course remained close to a busy
suburban thoroughfare. Outside, a blinking yellow tra c light
stood watch like a sentry.
Bu ett scarcely thought about spending his wealth on material
comforts. That wasn’t why he wanted it. The money was a proof: a
score-card for his favorite game.
He did ask Susie to upgrade his VW, explaining that it looked
bad when he picked up visitors at the airport. But he didn’t have
the slightest interest in it.
“What kind of car?” Susie asked.
“Any car. I don’t care what kind.”29 (She got him a wide- nned
Cadillac.)
Scott Hord, a vice president of Data Documents, the Omaha
computer-card company, got to the heart of the matter when
Bu ett and he ew to Houston on a business trip.
“Warren, what’s it feel like to be a millionaire?” Hord asked
innocently. “I’ve never known a millionaire.”
“I can have anything I want that money will buy. But I always
could.”
Whatever was the object of Scotty Hord’s fantasies—toys, trucks,
cars, paintings, jewelry, silks—Bu ett could have had. But they
didn’t mean a thing to him. Bu ett’s fantasy was to be in Kiewit
Plaza, piling up more money day after day.
Paradoxically, Susie projected an air of disinterest in having
money but was a virtuoso shopper. She dropped $15,000 on a
home refurnishing, which “just about killed Warren,” according to
Bob Billig, one of his gol ng pals. Bu ett griped to Billig, “Do you
know how much that is if you compound it over twenty years?”

Beneath his becoming lack of acquisitiveness, Bu ett had a
certain obsession. In his mind, every dime had the potential of
Queen Isabella’s lost fortune. When a nickel today could become so
much more tomorrow, spending it drove him nuts. He didn’t even
buy life insurance, guring that he could compound the premiums
faster than an insurance company. ‡ Bu ett said of himself that he
was “working [his] way up to cheap.”30 (He was not stingy,
though, about picking up the check.)
When it came to money, Bu ett seemed to have twin
personalities—it was nothing to him and it was everything. He had
an overly reverent view of money’s proper role, as if spending
were a sort of sinfulness. Even when he dieted, he inserted money
into the equation. He would write a $10,000 check to his daughter,
payable on such-and-such a date unless his weight had dropped.
Little Susie would try to ply him with ice cream or drag him to
McDonald’s—but it was useless. Her daddy didn’t want the ice
cream as much as he wanted to keep the money.
Bu ett acknowledged his contrasting sentiments, quite
comically, one summer when the family was touring San Simeon,
the William Randolph Hearst mansion in California. The guide was
giving a blow-by-blow account of how much Hearst had paid for
every item—the drapes, carpets, antiques, and so on. Bored to
tears, Bu ett protested, “Don’t tell us how he spent it. Tell us how
he made it!”31
Bu ett’s money seems to have a ected him politically—but not
in the manner one would expect. As he became independently
wealthy—roughly during the early and middle sixties—he nally
asserted his political autonomy from his father. Warren based his
evolving politics not on his personal economic interests, as most
millionaires—and most people—do, but on his fears for society
writ large. In the turbulent 1960s, several issues awakened him.
The Cuban missile crisis morti ed him, just as Hiroshima had.
According to his friend Dick Holland:
Warren was afraid. He was interested in studying the attitudes that led to extreme

nationalism, and how wars could be prevented. He was always trying to calculate the

odds of the world’s blowing up.

Bu ett read Bertrand Russell, the paci st philosopher and
mathematician, extensively during this period, and adopted much
of Russell’s internationalist outlook.32 An agnostic like Russell, and
deeply aware of his mortality, Bu ett thought it was up to society,
collectively, to protect the planet from dangers such as nuclear
war. Unlike his isolationist and antigovernment father, Warren
recognized a need for government.
This was also true on the burning issue of civil rights. Omaha
had a substantial black population, and strict segregation in
housing and many jobs. Howard Bu ett did not have a public
record on civil rights, but as an avid member of the John Birch
Society,33 he presumably did not lose sleep over it.
Warren was emphatically on the other side. He quit the Omaha
Rotary Club speci cally because he objected to its racist and elitist
policies.34 Discrimination collided with his belief in merit and his
faith in neutral yardsticks, which lay at the heart of his investing.
In the same vein, he thought it was wrong that rich kids got a big
head start over everyone else.
Bu ett was also being exposed to the idealism of his wife. Susie
was an organizer and an active member of the Panel of Americans,
a group of Omaha women of various religions and races who
would speak to churches, schools, and clubs about their experiences
with ethnic prejudice. The panel included a refugee from Nazi
camps, a Mississippi-born black, and so on. Susie would give the
Wasp perspective. In the Omaha of the early and mid-sixties, the
Panel of Americans was rather daring.35 Women of Susie’s caste
were expected to go to Junior League meetings. The Bu etts,
though, were one of the few families in the lily-white Happy
Hollow area—for a while, probably the only family—that regularly
and routinely entertained blacks at home.
Repelled by the Republicans’ indi erence to civil rights, Warren
decided to break from his father’s party and become a Democrat.
This was a major step for him. His father, his best friend, was

ghting a protracted battle with cancer, and the GOP had been a
huge part of his life.
In the winter of 1964, Howard was su ering greatly and
stoically. Warren would go to the hospital every night. One
evening, he had “a di cult conversation with him about changing
parties.”36 As he explained to Charlie Munger, he wasn’t sure that
his father was wrong on a lot of issues, but he didn’t want to be
“consumed by ideology” as Howard had been. (Perhaps to spare
his father anguish, Warren didn’t change parties or publicly
acknowledge the switch until Howard’s death.)
In the spring, his father took a turn for the worse. After learning
of his condition, Bu ett showed up for a table tennis game at Dick
Holland’s looking clearly out of sorts. But he kept the awful news
to himself. Not many days later, Bu ett arrived home looking
glummer than his daughter had ever seen him. “He was very
withdrawn and sad,” she recalled. “I think I asked him why he
wasn’t going to the hospital. He said, ‘Grandpa died today.’ Then
he went upstairs.”
Five hundred mourners attended Howard’s funeral. Colleagues
from both parties saluted his integrity and warmth. Warren sat
through it silently. Then, he left town, without telling friends of his
where-abouts.37 When Bu ett returned to Kiewit Plaza, he hung a
large-size likeness of his father on the wall facing his desk. But his
best friend was gone.
As his father had been with him, Warren was a moral exemplar
to his own children. But Warren was the same unsentimental
analyst with his kids as he was with his partners. He was a
concerned parent, and a supportive one—but not demonstrative.
He took Susie to the o ce on Saturdays, as his father had taken
him; he threw a football with Howie and helped Pete with his
math. But he rarely if ever talked to them about subjects—such as
his own parents—that might have exposed his feelings.
He and little Susie shared a certain tenderness. But Warren’s
sons felt emotionally neglected by him. Howie, the second child,
was a bit of a troublemaker, and was repeatedly frustrated by his
dad’s lack of outward feeling.38 “I used to misinterpret his tone to

mean that he didn’t care about me,” he said. “It’s the exact same
quality that makes him so good as an investor. There was no
emotion in it.”
Most people—high-powered executives perhaps especially—tend
to compartmentalize their lives. They may be tigers at the o ce
and kittens at home. But Bu ett was all of a remarkably consistent
piece. To young Peter, his father ran on an inner clock whose
springs and gears never ceased to turn. Day to day, Bu ett was in
his own solar system.39 “I remember I gave him a birthday card
once,” Peter said. “He just sort of opened it and closed it—he read
it that fast. I guess I was waiting for some response.” Warren was
expressive in his letters, but mute with his son.
A bit later, when Peter was in a drugstore with his mother, he
saw a book called The Father’s Handbook. He said rather ippantly,
“You should get that for Dad.” So she did. When Warren got the
book, he called Peter up to his study and said, “Hey, what’s going
on? What do you mean?” Peter meant there was nothing that he
could tell his dad that his father wanted to know—or such was
Peter’s impression then. Bu ett, obviously, was concerned. But he
couldn’t show it. He made e orts to reach out, but they struck
Peter as halfhearted.
The Bu ett house was like a storm center with Warren at its eye.
As little Susie said, her father was always reading. The house was a
hub of comings and goings: friends, relatives, lonely-hearts talking
to Susie. Susie herself went around the house singing. The kids
would climb from the attic onto the Dutch gambrel roof, or go
trooping into the family room. And Warren was just up there,
buried in his work. He would dart out of his study just long enough
to grab a Pepsi with syrupy cherry avoring or to entreat his wife
to calm the kids. “Susan-O—tell them to quiet down.”
His abstractedness was a running joke. One time he came
downstairs and asked what had happened to the greenback
wallpaper in the study. Susie had changed it a couple of years
before.
Susie tolerated him perhaps because Warren, in his
absentminded way, was unfailingly good-natured. As she said to

her sister, “You can’t get mad at someone who is so funny.”
Moreover, she, and even the children, understood that Warren was
on a sort of spiritual mission that diverted him from the more
routine aspects of family living. They referred to his o ce, only
half-jokingly, as the “temple.” His work was a “canvas”—a work of
art. Susie, referring to Bu ett’s maestrolike self-absorption, once
remarked to Marshall Weinberg, their Manhattan stockbroker
chum, “Let’s face it—I’m married to Artur Rubinstein.”40
Weinberg, a music lover, knew full well. Bu ett could hum the
chords, and the concertinos, and even the entire symphonies of
Wall Street in his sleep. Once in a while, Weinberg would play a
few bars for his friend, hoping—just once—to show him something
new. One time, for instance, he told Bu ett about a certain cement
stock that was cheap relative to its book value. Bu ett shot back,
“Yeah, but the book isn’t worth anything. Look at the record of
selling cement plants in the last seven years.”41
As Weinberg also knew, the explanation, or part of it, lay in
Bu ett’s relentless focusing on his craft. In 1965, after Weinberg
had returned from a trip to Egypt, Warren and Susie visited him at
his Manhattan apartment. Few Americans had been to Egypt, and
Weinberg, who was so often impressed with Bu ett, was eager to
show his genius friend his slides of the pyramids.
Bu ett said easily, “I have a better idea. Why don’t you show the
slides to Susie and I’ll go into your bedroom and read an annual
report.” The pyramids were out of his zone, like the wallpaper.
The report that Bu ett had with him may well have been Walt
Disney Productions’. At around the time of his visit to Weinberg, he
went to see the company’s latest lm, Mary Poppins, in Times
Square. Needless to say, Bu ett was not so interested in Julie
Andrews, the show’s star, but in Disney’s stock.
Settling into a seat, with his tweeds, briefcase, and popcorn, he
noticed that the other patrons were staring at him. He suddenly
realized that he was the only adult unaccompanied by a child, and
must have looked rather odd.42
But when the theater went dark, the other moviegoers forgot
him. Bu ett saw that they were riveted to the picture, and he asked

himself, in e ect, what it would be worth to own a tiny bit of each
of those people’s ticket revenues—for today and tomorrow and as
many tomorrows as they kept coming back to Disney.
In the summer, when the Bu etts were in California, they went
with the Mungers to Disneyland. While the kids did the park,
Bu ett and Munger dissected it nancially, ride for ride, a kind of
Fellini fantasy version of a corporate balance sheet.43
Subsequently, Bu ett visited Walt Disney himself on the Disney
lot. The animator, meeting him in shirtsleeves, was as enthusiastic
as ever. Bu ett was struck by his childlike enchantment with his
work—so similar to Bu ett’s own.44
Disney’s stock, meanwhile, was trading at only about ten times
earnings. Bu ett tried to analyze it not as a stock, but as a whole
company, perhaps as a business down the street in Omaha that
was willing to sell him a part ownership.45 In Bu ett’s view, its
most valuable feature was its library of old cartoons and lms,
such as Snow White and Bambi. A Ben Graham would not have been
interested in such an imprecise asset. However, Bu ett estimated
that, on a proportional basis, the library alone was worth the price
of a share.46 Plus, he would own a slice of Disneyland, and he
would have the unpretentious Mr. Disney as his partner. With such
thoughts in mind, Bu ett bought 5 percent of Disney for $4
million.47 Disney himself would be dead within the year.
Bu ett, it should be understood, was not abandoning the
Graham credo of hunting for securities that were well below
“intrinsic value.” But his de nition of value was changing, or
rather, broadening. To Bu ett, the value of Disney’s lm library,
even though imprecise and mostly o the books, was no less real
than a tangible asset such as a factory.
He was no doubt encouraged by his similar bet on American
Express, which had begun to see its way clear of the salad-oil
scandal. By 1965, the stock had hit 73½, double its recent low. And
Bu ett Partnership beat the Dow that year by a phenomenal 33
percentage points.
Bu ett warned his partners not to expect a repeat.48 In the
following year he would top the Dow by 36 percentage points. But

then, his doleful forecasts had long been sounding like a broken
record. Fearful that success would sow the seeds of
disappointment, he had repeatedly prophesied his own fall.
[January 1962:] If my performance is poor, I expect partners to withdraw.… [January

1963:] It is a certainty that we will have years when … we deserve the tomatoes.…
[January 1964:] I believe our margin over the Dow cannot be maintained.… [January

1965:] We do not consider it possible on an extended basis to maintain the 16.6
percentage point advantage over the Dow.… [January 1966:] Those who believe 1965
results can be achieved with any frequency are probably attending weekly meetings of

the Halley’s Comet Observers Club. We are going to have loss years and are going to

have years inferior to the Dow—no doubt about it.… [July 1966:] Such results should
be regarded as decidedly abnormal.

That is what he said. But his wings refused to melt. Over the
partnership’s second ve years, Bu ett’s record was o the charts:
PARTNERSHIPS

DOW

1962:

+13.9%

–7.6%

1963:

+38.7

+20.6

1964:

+27.8

+18.7

1965:

+47.2

+14.2

1966:

+20.4

–15.6

And the cumulative record, over ten years:
PARTNERSHIP

DOW

+1,156%

+122 .9% 49

After deducting for Bu ett’s share of the pro ts, his limited
partners’ investment had risen by 704.2%—six times the gain in
the Dow. For an original investor, such as the Edwin Davis family,

each $100,000 had grown to $804,000. (The Davises, like others,
had continued to put in more money along the way.)
Bu ett Partnership’s total assets, as of the start of 1966, had
swelled to $44 million. Bu ett, in other words, was running a fairsized enterprise (though still far smaller than the big mutual
funds). And at age thirty- ve, he was a very rich man. He wrote to
his partners in January 1966, “Susie and I have an investment of
$6,849,936, which should keep me from slipping away to the
movies in the afternoon.”50
He also got a rst taste of the limelight. In May, readers of the
Omaha World-Herald awoke to Bu ett’s toothy, chipmunkish grin at
the top of the second section. Bu ett was pictured with an ear to
the phone, unstylishly short hair, and a look of unmistakable
eagerness. According to the hometown World-Herald:
One of the most successful investment businesses in the United States is operated in
Omaha by a young man who bought his rst stock at age 11.51

A more probing interviewer, reporting on the changes at Berkshire
Hathaway for a textile-industry trade paper, zeroed in on Bu ett’s
seeming contradictions:
While his approach is informal, he never gives the impression of being o hand. If his

manner is casual, he is obviously a man with his facts well in hand.… Bu ett doesn’t
dodge questions … but sometimes he’s a tri e oblique.52

The general nancial press and the broader business public had
not heard a word of him. But to investors such as the Davises,
Bu ett’s stature was rising to mythological proportions. This one
man—this kid-was making them rich. Lee Seemann, Edwin Davis’s
son-in-law, who was a salesman for International Harvester, who
liked to hunt ducks and go to football games, who had big Lyndon
Johnson ears and had no business dreaming of money, was getting
rich. He felt he was living in a fairy tale.53 The investors began to
think of themselves as a privileged tribe—as blessed.

Bu ett invited groups of them to the house once a year. The
partners looked forward to these dinners with the oracle. Susie had
the place spi ed up, and she would sidle up to each guest in turn
and draw him or her out. And Bu ett would recount his coups of
the past year and spin little stories, stressing how he had gotten
himself into a jam or a comical situation, such as how, when he
had been trying to save Dempster, he had had to walk a very ne
line because the yokels in Beatrice were convinced that he was out
to destroy the company, or, going back to Wilson Coin Op, he had
had to put on an act for the barbers to keep the pinball ma a from
running him out of town. The hero of these cracker-barrel tales
seemed to be a sort of middlingly talented but plucky Huck Finn, a
modest sort who triumphed almost despite himself. And his guests
hung on his words. Leland Olson, an investor, remembered the
stories for years. “They would fascinate you. And he didn’t talk
down to you,” Olson said.
The investors, in fact, were starting to worship Bu ett. Roxanne
Brandt, wife of the broker Henry, wrote in her daughter’s baby
book under “Three greatest minds of the era”: Schweitzer, Einstein,
and Warren Bu ett. He was the unassuming genius who drank
nothing but Pepsi-Cola and could beat the pants o Wall Street
year after year.
Bu ett encouraged it as only a con dent and successful man
may do, with modesty. The self-deprecating quips, like the humble
prognostications of his own decline, merely con rmed his
investors’ awe of him. The worship surely delighted him, but it also
made him edgy. With each successful vault, the bar of expectations
climbed. The brighter his star, the darker was the shadow of a
looming burnout. Bu ett had been saying all along that it could
not go on forever. On Wall Street, nothing does.
* He was convicted and sentenced to ten years. In 1992, De Angelis resurfaced—charged with

using a fraudulent letter of credit to obtain $1.1 million worth of meat. He was convicted
again.

† Mark Twain, though a poor investor, had a similar strategy: “Put all your eggs in the one
basket and—watch that basket.”

‡ There was one exception. According to Kay Koetter, an insurance agent, some of Bu ett’s

partners were so concerned about losing their investment if Bu ett dropped dead that Bu ett
bought a policy and named them as the bene ciary.

Chapter 6

GO-GO

I am out of step with present conditions.

WARREN BUFFETT,
LETTER TO PARTNERS, OCTOBER 1967

Graham’s generation had retired, taking its grim Depression
memories with it. Wall Street had reawakened to a younger breed,
many of whom had not been alive in 1929, and who were bored
with their elders’ endless recitations. More important, they had no
memory of the heady years before the Crash. For them, speculation
bore no curse; the bull market of the sixties was as fresh as rst
love. Even the stocks that they traded were new—electronics
issues, big conglomerates, small growth stocks. These all required a
faith, but faith there was aplenty. Stocks were going up.
This had hardly bothered Bu ett when his fund was small. But as
his capital swelled, he grew increasingly antsy. The combination of
more cash to invest and fewer bargains had him trapped. He
complained of being pressed for ideas and, bit by bit, of a strain.
Indeed, his letters of the later sixties read like an inverted chronicle
of the age. Wall Street waxed ever more euphoric, Bu ett, more
doubting.

Early in 1966, he took the fateful step of closing the partnership
to new accounts.*
The only way to make this e ective is to apply it across-the-board and I have noti ed
Susie that if we have any more children, it is up to her to nd some other partnership
for them.1

As Bu ett was shutting o the spigot, Wall Street was being
deluged. The war in Vietnam was pumping up the stock market to
record heights. Young people, it is true, were marching in the
streets, but their parents, seeing the war’s expansionary e ects,
were queuing at brokers. Mutual funds opened by the dozen, and
the Dow Jones Industrial Average broke 1,000 for the rst time
ever. It repeated this death-defying act on three more occasions;
alas, it closed beneath the magic number each time. Then, in the
spring of 1966, the market went into a steep swoon. (New money
is jittery money.) Increasingly, investors were focusing on the
shorter term.
Some of Bu ett’s partners called to “warn” him that the market
might go lower still. Such calls, Bu ett shot back, raised two
questions:
(1) if they knew in February that the Dow was going to 865 in May, why didn’t they

let me in on it then; and, (2) if they didn’t know what was going to happen during the
ensuing three months back in February, how do they know in May?

Inevitably, the advice of such partners was to sell until the future
was “clear.” For some reason, market commentators su er a
peculiar blind spot. They routinely assume that once the
“uncertainty” of the immediate moment is lifted they will have a
plain view of the future unto Judgment Day. The fact that they did
not foresee the present uncertainty does not deter them from
thinking that no new clouds will trouble the future.
Let me again suggest [that] the future has never been clear to me (give us a call when
the next few months are obvious to you—or, for that matter, the next few hours).2

Bu ett avoided trying to forecast the stock market, and most
assuredly avoided buying or selling stocks based on people’s
opinions of it. Rather, he tried to analyze the long-term business
prospects of individual companies. This owed to his bias for logical
reasoning. One could “predict” the market trend, as one could
predict which way a bird would y when it left the tree. But that
was guesswork—not analysis. If he ever sold stocks “just because
some astrologer thinks the quotations may go lower,” he warned,
they would all be in trouble.3
The Dow did go lower, into the 700s, but the broader market was
frothy. In two cases, just as Bu ett had begun to buy what he
considered to be hot prospects, competitors snatched the stocks
away. (Like most pros, Bu ett built a position in a stock gradually,
to avoid driving up the price while he was buying.) One of them
rose to a price way out of his range; the other was taken over.4
Nothing made him madder.
In such a climate, Bu ett’s obsession with secrecy rose to the
level of paranoia. His brokers were given to understand that under
no circumstance were they to speak of Bu ett’s stock picks, even to
people in their o ces. According to Kay Koetter, an Omaha bridge
crony, Bu ett even got the idea that his Kiewit Plaza o ce was
being bugged via “telescopic ampli cation” from the nearby
Blackstone Hotel. Bu ett hired a security rm to check it out,
Koetter added, but found nothing.
The real problem was not that people were stealing his stocks,
but that he couldn’t nd enough that met his standards. In part,
Graham’s disciples had become too numerous. Aided by the
computer, they were plucking the bargains o the trees.
At the start of 1967, Bu ett felt compelled to advise his partners
that some of the newer mutual funds had better recent returns than
his own. Moreover, he warned that his stream of new ideas was
down to a “trickle.” Though he was working night and day to keep
them coming, his tone was ominous. If his idea ow “should dry up
completely, you will be informed honestly and promptly so that we
may all take alternative action.”5

It is noteworthy that Bu ett was sending o these dire alarums
in direct proportion to the giddiness on Wall Street. To money
men, these were the Go-Go years. There was a frenzy for
electronics stocks, each new issue of which was held to be the next
Xerox. Had Wall Street suddenly developed an expertise in
electronics? To ask the question was to misunderstand the age.
Wall Street believed in electronics. Even a toad such as American
Music Guild could become a prince by calling itself Space-Tone
Electronics Inc.
The buzz for high-tech was followed by a merger wave,
propelled by huge conglomerates such as International Telephone
& Telegraph, Litton Industries, and Ling-Temco-Vought. The public
of that con dent time did not mistrust bureaucracy; it conferred on
big organizations (as on technology) a mystique of competence.
Then, there was a burst of “letter stock”—unregistered shares,
often of highly dubious companies, that were marked to absurd
valuations. Though each of these fashions had its ebb and ow, as
one bubble burst a new fad took its place, so that as the sixties ran
their course Wall Street gathered an ever more intoxicating
speculative momentum.
The archetype of the Go-Go era was the “performance fund,” an
acid-rock version of the conventional mutual fund. This new
species attempted to outperform the market not over the long
term, but over each successive quarter, month, week, and virtually
every hour. Performance funds were run by sideburned gunslingers
who were bent on making money fast. They switched from stock to
stock, moving to the one that was hot, like an actor running from
house to house to sustain the applause. The aim, in short, was to
catch the momentary swing. Gerald Tsai, manager of the
Manhattan Fund, was the rst prodigy of the breed; it was said
that a whisper of Tsai’s involvement in a stock was su cient to set
o a small stampede. For the gunslinger wanted nothing of
Howard Bu ett’s sweet independence. He was a contemporary
man, young in age and devoid of memory.

What manner of young man was he? He came from a prospering middle-income

background and often from a good business school; he was under thirty, often well
under; he wore boldly striped shirts and broad, owing ties; he radiated a con dence,
a knowingness, that verged on insolence, and he liberally tossed around the newest

clichés, “performance,” “concept,” “innovative,” and “synergy”; he talked fast and
dealt hard.6

Go-Go reached an epitome with Fred Carr, who drew a blaze of
publicity as head of the Enterprise Fund. In 1967, he registered a
gain of 116 percent, far outstripping any single year of Bu ett’s.7
Carr invested in tiny, so-called emerging growth companies and
heaps of unregistered letter stock. He was lionized in the press as
“cool and decisive.” The very model of the new breed, Carr
installed a phone in his bathroom in Beverly Hills and sped to
work in a Jaguar. His o ce was decorated with op art. His
strategy was simple: “We fall in love with nothing. Every morning
everything is for sale—every stock in the portfolio, and my suit
and my tie.”8
On paper, Go-Go’s practitioners were getting rich. If the popular
stocks were going up, why not simply buy them? The question
nagged at Bu ett continuously, and he kept a diary of his
reactions, as much for his own bene t as for his partners’.
“Fashion” investing, he wrote,
does not completely satisfy my intellect (or perhaps my prejudices), and most

de nitely does not t my temperament. I will not invest my own money based upon
such an approach—hence, I will most certainly not do so with your money.9

According to his son Peter, Bu ett identi ed with The Glenn
Miller Story, the Hollywood epic in which the band leader searches
to nd his “sound.” For Bu ett, the right sound was a matter not
just of making money, but of superior reasoning. Being right on a
stock had something of the purity of a perfect move in chess; it had
an intellectual resonance. Glenn Miller or Bobby Fischer, Bu ett
simply refused to go outside his ken.

We will not go into businesses where technology which is away [sic] over my head is
crucial to the investment decision. I know about as much about semiconductors or
integrated circuits as I do of the mating habits of the chrzaszez.10

It seemed that the dizzier Go-Go’s success, the greater was
Bu ett’s urge to apply the brakes. Indeed, he kept a newspaper
clipping of the 1929 crash in plain view on his wall, just as a
reminder. He had no op art, nor anything else that might have
been in vogue in Beverly Hills-just the big maroon Moody’s books
lined up on the radiator, and a few pictures. His o ce might have
been that of a moderately successful dentist. The reception area
had a hanging Franklinesque aphorism, “A fool and his money are
soon invited everywhere,” and an 1880 photograph of Wall Street.
There was no sign of activity in the Fred Carr sense. Bu ett did not
even have a stock ticker. (Tickers give minute-by-minute readings
of stock prices. Virtually every professional investor has one, or a
computerized equivalent, and checks it throughout the day.)
Bu ett’s portfolio seemed almost as dated as his newspaper
clippings. In 1966 and 1967, the partnership bought a pair of
retailers, Hochschild, Kohn & Co., a Baltimore department store,
and Associated Cotton Shops, a dress shop chain, for a total of
about $15 million. In each case, Bu ett bought not liquid shares of
stock but the entire business. Among fund managers, this was
unheard-of. Bu ett had often bought stocks with the intent of
holding them for the long term, but he was locked into Hochschild
and Associated. He could not pick up the phone and sell them like
Fred Carr’s necktie. Moreover, to say that inner-city retailing was
out of vogue would be a serious understatement. But both
companies were cheap, and Bu ett thought he could make a pro t
as an operator.
When he inquired about Associated, he amazed Benjamin
Rosner, the sixty-three-year-old owner, with his grasp of retailing.
But he understood the business only through the keyhole of
nance. When Rosner o ered to show him a store, Bu ett declined,
explaining that he wouldn’t know what he was looking at. He
merely wanted Rosner to read him the previous ve years’ balance

sheets over the telephone. The next day, Bu ett called back with
an o er.11 When Rosner accepted, Bu ett took Charlie Munger to
New York to ink the deal.
Associated was potentially a lemon. Its stores were in
deteriorating, inner-city neighborhoods, and Rosner, its architect,
was planning to retire. Sensing that he would need a Sancho Panza
once again, Bu ett demurely asked Rosner if he could stay on for
six months to help him get going. Privately, Bu ett shrewdly told
Munger, “That’s one problem we don’t have. This guy won’t be
able to quit.”
The son of Austro-Hungarian immigrants, Rosner had started
with a single dress shop, in Chicago, in 1931. He was an
archetypal bootstrapper, having taken a $3,200 grubstake to a
business with $44 million in annual sales. Like other selfimprovers, he was a slave to his work and a dictator to the sta .
His penny-pinching work ethic may have reminded Bu ett of his
grandfather, the erstwhile monarch of Bu ett & Son grocery.
Rosner (Bu ett loved to relate) had once counted the sheets on a
roll of toilet paper to avoid being cheated—de nitely Bu ett’s kind
of guy. He attered Rosner profusely, and though he asked him for
monthly nancial reports, he stayed out of Rosner’s hair (and out
of his stores), which suited both of them. As Bu ett had predicted,
Rosner soon found that he was in not, in fact, in any great hurry to
retire, and began to squeeze the proverbial lemonade from
lemons.†
Hochschild, the Baltimore retailer, was not so easily salvaged.
Not only was the main store out-of-date (one wing had access only
via a staircase), it required frequent additions of capital just to
maintain its market share. And downtown Baltimore was badly
decaying. Cheap price or no, it did not take Bu ett long to realize
that he had goofed.
Another long-term “bargain,” textile maker Berkshire Hathaway,
also was having problems. The suit business was depressed, just as
the clothier Sol Parsow had warned. In midsummer 1967, Bu ett
soberly informed his partners that he did not see anything to
suggest that it would improve.12

Wall Street, meanwhile, was feeling oh so happy. It was not
only pro table but—for the rst time since the twenties—fun.
Trading volume was soaring. Consider, when Bu ett started out, in
the 1950s, volume on the New York Stock Exchange had been two
million shares a day; by 1967, it was ten million. The buoyant
spirit was mockingly captured by Abbie Ho man, who visited the
exchange that summer and threw dollar bills from the gallery while
oor clerks scurried for the loot. On the West Coast, customers at
Kleiner Bell stood in front of the ticker tape cheering “Go, go, go.”
The Dow roared back to the low 900s.
As if on cue, Congress held—what else?—hearings. In August,
Paul Samuelson, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
economist, appeared before the very Senate Banking Committee
that Ben Graham had faced a decade earlier. This time the subject
was the rampant growth of mutual funds. Samuelson testi ed that
fty thousand mutual fund salesmen—one for every seventy
investors—were combing the country. Most were plainly
incompetent, but were sustained by the industry’s abusively high
fees. It was common for funds to charge their investors an up-front
sales load of 8.5 percent. This did not cover annual management
fees; it was merely to pay for marketing and to keep the salesman
in shoe leather. (Bu ett, in contrast, took a share of the pro ts, but
nothing up-front and no management fee.) According to
Samuelson:
Only 91½ cents of my every dollar will ever work for me now to produce income and

capital gains, and 9.3 percent of this amount has gone forever in the form of selling
charges.13

A by-product of the mutual fund boom was the rise of a class of
mandarin investors. For the rst time, the pros—mutual funds,
pensions, and the like—had more in uence in markets than the
individual du er. In Bu ett’s view, the professional was more
speculative, not less; the old saw that the pro kept his cool while
the amateur fell victim to emotionalism was inside out. In the
words of one canny observer:

It might have been supposed that competition between expert professionals,
possessing judgment and knowledge beyond that of the average private investor,

would correct the vagaries of the ignorant individual left to himself. It happens,

however, that the energies and skill of the professional investor and speculator are
mainly occupied otherwise. For most of these persons are, in fact, largely concerned,
not with making superior long-term forecasts of the probable yield of an investment

over its whole life, but with foreseeing changes in the conventional basis of valuation

a short time ahead of the general public. They are concerned, not with what an
investment is really worth to a man who buys it “for keeps”, but with what the

market will value it at, under the in uence of mass psychology, three months or a
year hence.14

That, in fact, had been written by John Maynard Keynes, in
1936. Though Keynes, of course, is best remembered as a
macroeconomist, Bu ett read him for his considerable insights into
markets. Indeed, Keynes’s career in some ways pre gured Bu ett’s.
Early on, he lost large sums speculating in currencies, corn, cotton,
and rubber. Then, renouncing his sins, he became an apostle of
long-term, selective investing.15 He pursued the market with calm,
devoting to it an hour in bed in the morning, yet compiling a
stellar record for his own account and for that of King College. His
speeches at the annual meetings of the National Mutual Life
Assurance Society, of which he was chairman, were celebrated in
the London of the 1930s for their impact on market prices.
For Bu ett, Keynes’s relevance during the Go-Go era was his
keen understanding of how crowds could in uence market prices.
The stock market is a crowd, consisting of whoever is following
prices at any given moment. This amorphous assemblage revalues
prices every day, even every hour. Yet the outlook for a given
business—say, a Walt Disney—changes far more slowly. The
public’s ardor for Mary Poppins is unlikely to change from a
Tuesday to a Wednesday, or even over a month or two. Most of the
uctuations in Disney’s shares, therefore, derive from changes not
in the business but in the way that the business is perceived. And
the pros were preoccupied merely with outwitting the crowd, that

is, with staying a step ahead of its eeting shifts in opinion. Again,
Keynes:
We have reached the third degree where we devote our intelligences to anticipating
what average opinion expects the average opinion to be.16

One sees in Bu ett a strongly similar suspicion of public opinion.
Bu ett viewed a crowd as a potential source of a sort of
intellectual contagion. It was the author of acts and feelings which,
rather than being a summing-up of the parts, no one individual
among the crowd would have subscribed to alone.17
Bu ett illustrated this with an allegory about an oil prospector,
who arrived at heaven’s gate only to hear the distressing news that
the “compound” reserved for oilmen was full. Given permission by
Saint Peter to say a few words, the prospector shouted, “Oil
discovered in hell!”—whereupon every oilman in heaven departed
for the nether reaches. Impressed, Saint Peter told him there was
now plenty of room. Quoting Bu ett:
The prospector paused. “No,” he said, “I think I’ll go along with the rest of the boys.
There might be some truth to that rumor after all.”18

Bu ett had heard the story from Ben Graham, though he did not
set it to paper until much later. In the Go-Go era, the story was not
at all far-fetched. The performance funds hopped on “story” stocks
—that is, stocks with a simple concept (“Oil discovered in hell!”)
that might catch on in a hurry. A notorious example was National
Student Marketing, which was sold to the public at 6 and vaulted
to 82 within a year.
National Student Marketing was the brainchild of Cortes Wesley
Randall, a thirty-something Gatsby who lumped under one
umbrella a group of businesses purportedly serving college kids:
books, records, youth airfare cards, and so on. He thus combined
the public mania for conglomerates with a novel “story”—youth.
In addition, Randell was a hell of a salesman. He attered security
analysts, took them on tours of his Virginia castle, and called them

from his Learjet. Each year, Randell predicted trebled earnings.
And each year, he met his target—though not, it would develop,
without some help from the company’s accountants. But Wall
Street believed, and pushed the stock to 140. One was reminded of
Galbraith’s comment, with regard to the twenties, that “perhaps it
was worth being poor for a long time to be rich for just a little
while.”19 No less than Bankers Trust, Morgan Guaranty, and the
Harvard endowment fund bought Randell’s stock.20
One wonders how such silk-stocking paragons could be so
gullible. The answer is, they were afraid to be left behind. The
choice was to buy the popular stocks, which, after all, were rising,
or to risk momentarily lagging the pack. And those who lagged,
even for a quarter or two, could not raise new capital. For a
money manager in the Go-Go days there were no second acts.
The watershed moment was a 1967 critique from McGeorge
Bundy, president of the Ford Foundation, and the very
embodiment of pinstriped conservatism. Bundy sternly took his
fellow endowment-fund managers to task—not for being too bold,
but for being insu ciently so:
We have the preliminary impression that over the long run caution has cost our
colleges and universities much more than imprudence or excessive risk-taking.21

This knocked the Street on its ear. If the Ford Foundation was
encouraging people to take more risk, what duciary need be
timid? Moreover, Bundy, the former national security adviser and
Vietnam War architect, backed his words with deeds. He far
overspent the foundation’s income, reckoning that he could make
up the capital shortfall with trenchant plays in the market. He
remarked to Fortune, with a self-assurance worthy of Camelot, “I
may be wrong, but I’m not in doubt.”22
In October 1967, months after the Bundy encyclical, Bu ett, like
a rival pope, issued a manifesto of his own. He was not so selfassured as Bundy; in fact, Bu ett had nothing but doubts. The
partnership had $65 million, but where would he put it? The
bargains were gone, and the game had changed.

Wall Street was putting more and more chips on ever briefer
spins of the wheel. It was true, Bu ett told his partners, that this
self-ful lling merry-go-round had been quite pro table. It was also
true that the fashionable stocks might continue to go up.
Nonetheless, Bu ett was “sure” that he, personally, would not do
well with them. Nor did he wish to try. He could o er no proof that
prices were silly, only conviction.
When the game is no longer being played your way, it is only human to say the new
approach is all wrong, bound to lead to trouble, etc. I have been scornful of such

behavior by others in the past. I have also seen the penalties incurred by those who
evaluate conditions as they were—not as they are. Essentially I am out of step with

present conditions. On one point, however, I am clear. I will not abandon a previous

approach whose logic I understand even though it may mean forgoing large, and
apparently easy, pro ts to embrace an approach which I don’t fully understand, have
not practiced successfully and which, possibly, could lead to substantial permanent
loss of capital.23

Partners who had dismissed such stu as crying wolf were taken
up short. For the shocking kicker was this: Bu ett was dropping his
goal of beating the Dow by 10 percentage points a year. From now
on, he would strive for the far more modest goal of earning 9
percent a year or of beating the Dow by 5 percentage points—
whichever was less. Partners with better opportunities might
“logically” decide to leave, “and you can be sure I will be wholly in
sympathy with such a decision.”
There was also a hint of midlife crisis. Bu ett personally was
worth more than $10 million; he wanted “a less compulsive
approach” than when he was “younger and leaner.” At the ripe
age of thirty-seven he was thinking—astonishingly—of pursuing
noneconomic activities or, alternatively, businesses in which the
monetary payo would not be the sole consideration.
What is notable in such musings is that, even when looking in
the mirror, Bu ett retains his rational, almost mechanistic
objectivity. Unusually self-aware, he knew that if his stated goal
remained constant he would feel compelled to run as hard as ever.

Therefore, as if to change the settings on a laboratory rat, he was
lowering his target.
Elementary self-analysis tells me that I will not be capable of less than all-out e ort to
achieve a publicly proclaimed goal to people who have entrusted their capital to me.

But it is doubtful that Bu ett seriously tried to moderate his “allout e ort.” No one in his family noticed a “less compulsive
approach,” nor did they believe that he was really capable of it. As
young Susie recalled, it was virtually impossible to poke through
the fog of his concentration. A while after his letter—on the day
Susie got her driver’s license—she went out for a spin and
managed to hit another car, putting a small dent in her father’s
Lincoln. Naturally, the prospect of breaking such news to her
father put Susie in a delicate state. “By the time I got upstairs, I
was crying,” she recalled. “Dad was reading the newspaper. I said,
‘Dad, I wrecked your car.’ He didn’t look up. I kept crying, and
after ve seconds or so he said, ‘Was anyone hurt?’ I said, ‘No.’ I
waited there. He didn’t say anything. He didn’t look up.”
This was the new, less compulsive Bu ett. A few minutes later,
he realized that a fatherly word might be in order, and poked his
head into Susie’s room and said, “Suz, remember, the other guy is a
jerk.” And that was all he said. After dinner that night, Susie
wanted the car and he gave it to her without a word.
Bu ett’s investing record, certainly, did not skip a beat. Shortly
after his letter, he reported that in 1967 the partnership had
advanced 36 percent—17 percentage points more than the Dow.
Much of it was derived from American Express, which ballooned to
180 a share, and which at its peak represented 40 percent of the
portfolio.24 On that one $13 million investment, Bu ett made a
$20 million pro t.25 (He never did disclose the source of the
bonanza to his partners.) He also made a 55 percent pro t on Walt
Disney.26
Perhaps because his results were so uncanny, his partners lost
sight of the fact that it was a genuinely di cult time for him.
(Some wrote to ask if he had “really” meant it about being out of

step—which, Bu ett assured them, he absolutely had.)27 Just
because he was willing to forgo “large, easy pro ts” does not mean
that doing so was easy. In e ect, he had pivoted his career on a
single premise—that his instincts were correct and that those of
“Mr. Market” were wrong. Watching the continued success of GoGo must have been a torture for him.
Early in 1968, Bu ett turned to the one person who, at very
least, he felt would understand. Why not, he proposed, gather a
group of former Ben Graham students at the foot of the master?
Bu ett invited a dozen of his old chums, including Bill Ruane,
Marshall Weinberg, and Tom Knapp (and a few, such as Charlie
Munger, who had not been Graham students), to meet near San
Diego. He loyally asked the group not to bring “anything more
current than a 1934 edition of Security Analysis.”28 As is clear from
the protective tone of his letter, Bu ett was uneasy lest anyone try
to steal the spotlight from his hero.
I talked with Ben Graham today, and he likes the idea of the “select” group coming out
on Friday, January 26, when we will engage in a little cross fertilization. Knowing of
the propensity of some of you for speech making (and I feel a few

ngers pointing

toward me), I hasten to explain that he is the bee and we are the owers! As I look at

the addressees of this memo, I feel there is some danger of a degeneration of the

meeting into a Turkish rug auction unless we discipline ourselves to see what we can
learn from Ben, rather than take the opportunity to post him on how many of our
great ideas he has missed.29

Perhaps he was worried about the outspoken Charlie Munger,
who thought much of Graham’s teaching rather daft, and kept
prodding Bu ett to rethink it.30 In Munger’s view, it was better to
pay a fair price for a good business than a cut rate for a stinker.
The cheap business, too often, was so full of problems as to turn
out to be no “bargain.”
Bu ett, of course, knew this. In a revealing passage, not long
before, he had admitted that while he thought of himself primarily
as a Graham-style bargain hunter, “the really sensational ideas I
have had over the years have been heavily weighted toward the

qualitative side.”31 Certainly he had in mind American Express and
Disney. For all that, he still considered Graham-type stocks to be
his bread and butter: “the more sure money.” His teacher still had a
hold on him.32
En route to California, a few of the gang met in Las Vegas. The
thought of Bu ett loose on the strip is one to stir the pulse, but
evidently Graham’s disciples judged that playing the slots would be
poor preparation for the upcoming reunion. As recalled by Walter
Schloss, Bu ett’s former cellmate at Graham-Newman: “We went to
Caesars Palace—low rates, cheap food.”
The meeting with Graham was at the elegant Hotel del Coronado
(the setting for the Marilyn Monroe classic Some Like It Hot), across
the bay from San Diego. Graham arrived in a Socratic mood.
“You’re a bunch of smart fellows,” he began. “I’ve got a test for
you. Here are ten questions, true or false. I warn you, they are
tremendously di cult.” Nobody got more than half, except for Roy
Tolles, Munger’s law partner—who suspected a trick and wrote a T
for every one. Graham’s point was that an easy-looking game
could well be rigged—a subtle warning regarding the Go-Go era.33
“We loved having Ben there,” said Ed Anderson, Tom Knapp’s
partner. But the meeting was anticlimactic. Graham was feeling ill
and left early. And he had lost interest in playing the “bee.” The
assembly was really the nucleus of a Bu ett group.
His friends were bright, ambitious, and narrow. Henry Brandt
was a born worrier and workaholic who walked around the Beach
Point Club with his reading materials in a du el bag. The
imperious David “Sandy” Gottesman, who ran First Manhattan, an
investment advisory
rm, was singularly obsessed with the
nancial worth of himself and others. (In characteristic form at a
dinner at the Harvard Business School, Gottesman turned to a
woman he had just met and inquired, “Are you rich?”)
Marshall Weinberg, an outgoing, plumpish bachelor, was an
aesthete—interested in his pyramids and his Rubinstein. There
were two eclectics—Ed Anderson, a chemist turned money
manager who was into behavioral psychology, and Charlie
Munger. But the common thread was a passion for Wall Street.

They were intellectually curious about investing but could scarcely
go head-to-head with Graham on Spanish literature or the ancient
Greeks.
In San Diego, the disciples spent two days sharing their similarly
dour view of the market. “We were all commiserating” over the
lack of opportunities, Anderson said. Bu ett pumped Jack
Alexander, his Columbia classmate, for ideas, but was tightlipped
about his own.34 It is doubtful that he left San Diego with his view
of the stock market improved.
Indeed, Bu ett was starting to feel that managing a portfolio
was a bit of a rat race. One pu ed on a cigar butt and then tossed
it out; the ephemeral quality was unsatisfying.35 But he was
getting a kick from his investments in long-term, controlled
companies such as Berkshire and Associated, and from working
with their managers, such as the Horatio Alger-like Ben Rosner.
Admittedly, such companies were unlikely to match the heady
pro ts of American Express. Nonetheless:
When I am dealing with people I like, in businesses I nd stimulating (what business

isn’t?), and achieving worthwhile overall returns on capital employed (say, 10–12%),

it seems foolish to rush from situation to situation to earn a few more percentage
points.36

It is fair to ask why partners had hooked up with him if it was
not to make “a few more percentage points.” Strictly from the
standpoint of investment returns, Fred Carr seemed to make more
sense. “We fall in love with nothing.” Bu ett, though, assuredly was
falling for a few of his investments. Something other than math—
an urge for continuity-seemed to lie behind it. He had stayed
partial to Omaha, to Ben Graham, to his friends. All his life, he had
hungered for continuity. His great fear had been the supreme
discontinuity of dying. Selling was also a discontinuity. As with
other philosophical puzzles that he tossed in the air, he was not
sure where to draw the line—when, that is, to hang on to a
favored business and when to take a pro t. On Wall Street, no one
else even dreamed of such a question.

In 1968, a year when the country was seized by political unrest,
stock trading reached a frenzy. Volume on the Big Board averaged
thirteen million shares a day—30 percent more than the record
pace of 1967. On June 13, 1968, volume erupted to twenty-one
million shares. The kachung-kachung-kachung of the ticker seemed to
grow louder with each clash of antiwar marchers and ri e-bearing
guardsmen, as though the rising political temperature were
spawning a sympathetic fever on Wall Street. In that convulsive
summer of riots and assassination wakes, the stock exchange was
so swamped by paper that it was forced to shut down, for the rst
time in its history and for repeated days. One could hear in the
brief silence an SOS. But the market rallied on, like a drunk intent
on nishing the last bottle, oblivious to the light of dawn.
The broker Richard Jenrette dubbed it “the great garbage
market.”37 There was a frenzy for new issues such as Four Seasons
Nursing Center of America, Kentucky Fried Chicken, and Applied
Logic. Bu ett noted that spectacular sums were being made “in the
chain-letter type stock-promotion vogue. The game is being played
by the gullible, the self-hypnotized, and the cynical.”38 Most
assuredly, he had in mind the case of Frederick Mates, a selfproclaimed Robin Hood who ran the Mates Investment Fund from
an o ce that he dubbed a “kibbutz” and with a young sta that he
deemed his “ ower children.” Mates put much of the fund into a
tiny letter stock known as Omega Equities. Letter stock having no
quoted market, its value was uncertain. Mates, in calculating his
fund’s assets, assigned a value to Omega of $16 a share. This was
an interesting number, since Mates had acquired the stock for
$3.25. Thus, with no change in Omega’s outlook or prospects, the
Mates Fund was showing a book pro t of more than 400 percent.
39

Though only in his late thirties, Bu ett felt himself,
comparatively, in the “geriatric ward.”40 His competitors, whom he
had once scorned for supposed lethargy, were now evincing “acute
hypertension.” He noted that the manager of one fund had
asserted that it wasn’t enough to study stock prices week by week
or day by day: “Securities must be studied in a minute-by-minute

program.” Bu ett observed, “This sort of stu makes me feel guilty
when I go out for a Pepsi.”41
It was easy to imagine such letters as coming from a rube,
perhaps, one who had been dumped unawares on Wall Street and
was writing to an uncle back home about the shocking goings-on
in the city. The fact is that Bu ett was in no way detached from
Wall Street. He was on the line to stockbrokers and to traders
virtually every day, and on many days numerous times. Art
Rowsell, the chief trader at Cantor Fitzgerald, mused that he must
have spoken “one hundred million words” to Bu ett over the years.
And Bu ett’s circle of contacts was unusually wide. In fact, the
dope that he had in Omaha probably was as good as, if not better
than, most people’s in New York. What he did gain from Omaha
was a certain sense of proportion. Driving past a McDonald’s one
day, he told his son Howie, “It takes twenty years to build a
reputation and ve minutes to ruin it. If you think about that
you’ll do things di erently.”
People were surprised that a stock market wizard could get by in
Nebraska, especially during such a fast-paced period. Bu ett,
speaking about this in 1968 to Dun’s Review, remarked: “Omaha is
as good a spot as any. Here you can see the forest. In New York,
it’s hard to see beyond the trees.”
But what about the famed access of New Yorkers to “inside
information?”
Bu ett replied, “With enough inside information and a million
dollars you can go broke in a year.”42
This was a very Midwestern and revealing remark. The subtext
was that virtue could be as rewarding as sin—a notion directly
counter to the received wisdom on Wall Street.
It is illustrative to look at Bu ett’s investment in the same year,
1968, in Home Insurance. He was buying the stock over a period of
weeks, using Tom Knapp’s Manhattan-based company, Tweedy,
Browne & Knapp, as a broker. One day, after Tweedy Browne had
bought $50,000 worth of stock for him, Howard Browne, the
trading partner, got a call from Omaha. He put down the phone
and said, “That’s odd. Warren said, ‘Stop buying.’ ”

Home Insurance announced the next day that it was being taken
over by City Investing at a big premium. Presumably, Bu ett had
gotten a tip. But he did not take the $50,000 worth of stock—
meaning that he passed up a tidy pro t.43 Understand that taking
it would have been legal—though, had anyone been watching,
somewhat suspicious-looking.
Whether Bu ett felt his virtue or his self-interest to be at stake—
presumably, it was some of each—is almost irrelevant. He
recognized that the self-interested course and the virtuous one were
apt to coincide often enough so that one might as well play it safe.
Needless to say, this perspective was occasionally lacking among
some of his Wall Street peers.
Bu ett traveled to New York quite a bit, with Susie in the spring
and also at other times. He stayed at the Plaza, and saw a wide
array of business people and friends, among them investment
adviser Sandy Gottesman, Bill Ruane, Fortune writer Carol Loomis,
and up-and-coming hotelier Larry Tisch—all in all, a well-heeled
and well-connected crowd.
Yet Bu ett in Gotham had a faint air of Mr. Deeds, not least
because his speech was studded with gee-whiz, Ozzie-and-Harriet
talk (“dope,” “jerk,” “okey-dokey”).44 Though Susie preferred the
Café des Artistes, Bu ett dined with chums at joints such as the
Stage Delicatessen, where he would order his out-of-town-signature
roast beef w/mayo on white bread. One time, the intrepid
Marshall Weinberg suggested that they try something a bit less
bland—a Japanese steakhouse.
“Why don’t we go to Reuben’s?” Bu ett countered.
Weinberg pointed out that they had lunched at Reuben’s, an East
Side deli, the previous day.
“Right,” Bu ett said. “You know what you’re getting.”
“By that logic, we’d go there every day,” Weinberg said.
“Precisely. Why not eat there every day?”
Another time, Bu ett did lunch at the elegant Harmonie Club,
with Sam Stayman, the champion bridge player and a Bu ett
investor, and Stayman’s wife. Josephine Stayman was smitten by
Bu ett’s Midwestern informality. She recalled:

Afterward I was going uptown, where we lived. Warren was going uptown, too, I

think to another meeting. He said he felt very con ned in New York—did I mind if we
ran from 61st Street to 79th Street? This was before anybody was jogging in New York.

We ran up Madison and at a very fast pace. He was in his business clothes. He wanted
his freedom.

One thinks of the Washington schoolboy with the charmingly
unstylish tennis shoes. People were not accustomed to seeing
Omaha cowboys run up Madison Avenue. Nor were Americans, in
general, used to multimillionaires who ew coach class and looked
as if they had slept in their suits. What they expected of Wall Street
was J. P. Morgan; what they saw in Bu ett was Will Rogers.
Bob Malott, a Data Documents codirector, ran into Bu ett one
evening on Fifth Avenue, where Bu ett was pacing up and down
like a lost dog. Bu ett explained that he was measuring the land
underneath Best & Co., a department store. The Kansas-bred
Malott concluded that Bu ett was “unpretentious in a way I
wouldn’t think possible had he been raised in Greenwich,
Connecticut.”
Toward the end of 1968, the bull market showed signs of age. The
conglomerate bubble burst. Gerald Tsai’s Manhattan Fund plunged
to a ranking of 299th out of 305 funds, prompting Tsai to quit. In
December, the Securities and Exchange Commission suspended
trading in Omega Equities. For Fred Mates, a.k.a. the ower child,
this was really a bummer. The Mates Fund, which owned 300,000
shares of Omega, and which had been the top-ranked fund in the
country, faced a sudden run on its assets. In a desperate mood,
Mates persuaded the SEC to halt redemptions (equivalent to a
bank’s shutting the teller’s window). Mates, as it happened, was
due to speak on the investment outlook before a blue-chip
audience at the New York Hilton. The irony of his delivering his
expert opinion while his fund was going up in smoke seems to
have been lost on Mates himself. “There are no more reasons for
being afraid of what might happen in 1969 than there were in

1968,” Mates said con dently. Subsequently, the “window”
reopened and his fund traded down by 93 percent.45
And Mates was but a symptom. When his fund toppled, it was
clear that his would not be the last. Walter Stern, of Burnham &
Co., voiced a prescient fear that in a bear market the gunslingers
might turn to selling as indiscriminately as they had bought.46 Still,
the market was buoyed by the Paris peace talks. In December
1968, the Dow climbed to 990, and Wall Street cast a hopeful eye
toward a pair of elusive goals: an end to the war in Vietnam and a
1,000 Dow.
Bu ett Partnership clocked a gain in 1968 of $40 million, or 59
percent. Its assets swelled to $104 million. Bereft of ideas,
managing more money than ever, and with the market at a peak,
Bu ett had had his best year. He beat the Dow not by the 5
percentage points called for in his lower target, but by 50 points.
He said the result “should be treated as a freak—like picking up
thirteen spades in a bridge game.”47 It was his last hand.
The bull market was in a spasmodic death rattle. Wall Street was
recommending the popular stocks regardless of price. Merrill Lynch
liked International Business Machines at thirty-nine times
earnings. Bache & Co. was pushing Xerox at fty times. Blair & Co.
was touting Avon Products at fty-six times.48 At that level of
earnings, it would take a buyer of all of Avon half a century to get
his money out. Could it possibly be “worth” that much? A fund
manager, echoing the prevailing thinking, allowed that a stock
was worth whatever people think it’s worth at the particular time.
Every college endowment, he noted, felt it had “to own IBM and
Polaroid and Xerox and everything else. So … I think they will do
well.”49 Bu ett reminded partners of a seemingly lost distinction:
“Price is what you pay, value is what you get.”50
It no longer mattered. Finally, and irreversibly, he had despaired
of nding stocks. In May 1969, Business Week proclaimed that
Fred Carr “may just be the best portfolio manager in the U.S.”51
That same month, the man from Omaha made up his mind. Weary
of jeremiads and wary of jeopardizing past pro ts, Bu ett did a
remarkable thing. He quit. He stunned his partners with the news

that he was liquidating Bu ett Partnership. And now, at the height
of a bull market, he was getting out.
I am not attuned to this market environment, and I don’t want to spoil a decent record
by trying to play a game I don’t understand just so I can go out a hero.52

The courage that lay behind his decision may be measured by its
uniqueness. On Wall Street, people did not fold up and return the
money—not at the top, not after their best year. It simply wasn’t
done. Bu ett had plenty of options. He could simply have sold his
stocks, put his assets in cash, and waited for opportunities. But
every partner was looking to him to perform, and he felt an
inescapable pressure to lead the league each year.53 Since the
watershed letter of 1967 he had tried to work less compulsively,
but as long as he was “on stage,” it wasn’t possible.
If I am going to participate publicly, I can’t help being competitive. I know I don’t
want to be totally occupied with out-pacing an investment rabbit all my life. The only
way to slow down is to stop.54

His friend Dick Holland had the impression that Bu ett was
contemplating his “whole life,” and speci cally what he could do
with his money—of which he now had the astounding sum of $25
million.55 To his partners, Bu ett hinted at a change of pace:
Some of you are going to ask, “What do you plan to do?” I don’t have an answer to

that question. I do know that when I am 60, I should be attempting to achieve
di erent personal goals than those which had priority at age 20.56

Bu ett, who had raised funds for the quixotic presidential
campaign of Eugene McCarthy the year before, told the Omaha
World-Herald that he hoped to spend the bulk of his time working
“in any intelligent and e ective way possible” on human
problems.57 In another interview, he said he wanted to pursue
interests aside from merely making money.58
Bu ett began one such e ort immediately. Waspish Omaha did
not permit Jews in the Omaha Club, a downtown eating haunt for

businessmen. Bu ett had quite a few Jewish friends, including one
Nick Newman, who ran an Omaha grocery chain, and who was
incensed at being excluded. Bu ett brought it up with the board of
the club, and was told, “They [the Jews] have their own club.”
(Omaha also had several country clubs, each of them segregated.)
In Bu ett’s view, it was blatantly wrong:
Now there are Jewish families that have been in Omaha a hundred years, they have
contributed to the community all the time, they have helped build Omaha as much as

anybody, and yet they can’t join a club that John Jones, the new middle-rank Union
Paci c man, joins as soon as he’s transferred here. That is hardly fair.59

Of course, Bu ett was not about to lead a protest march outside
the Omaha Club. Characteristically, he opted for a passive and
indirect tactic, yet one that cleverly shifted the burden. Namely, he
applied for membership to the all-Jewish Highland Country Club.
The Highland had been founded in 1923, by Jewish golfers who
had been subjected to taunts of “kike” and “sheenie” on Omaha’s
public courses. Even in the sixties, anti-Semitic incidents were not
unknown, and Omaha’s Jews were neither entirely ready to
assimilate nor entirely welcome in gentile society. Highland’s
purists vehemently opposed letting Bu ett join. Their feeling was,
“This is our club and they’ll take it over.”60 Bu ett’s friends and the
club liberals, which included Omaha’s rabbis, favored integration.
The battle was heated, but on October 1, 1969, Bu ett was
admitted. Then he returned to the Omaha Club and informed them
that “the Jewish club” wasn’t totally Jewish anymore. Now the
Omaha Club had no excuse, and quickly admitted some Jews.
Bu ett would later make light of his motives—with him, a
telltale sign of strong feeling—by joking that he had joined
Highland because “the food was better.”61 In fact, he rarely went
there. Aside from his civil rights concern, one suspects that he had
a feeling for Jews in particular—perhaps a subtle homage to Ben
Graham, or an identi cation with underdogs. Rabbi Myer Kripke,
whose family were frequent guests at the Bu etts’, thought Bu ett

a “philo-Semite.” (Bu ett used to joke with Kripke that he had “a
nice Jewish boy” picked out for his daughter.)
In the minds of Omahans, the Highland episode loomed large. It
severed Bu ett from his John Bircher father. Rabbi Kripke, who
had taken issue with Howard Bu ett over the latter’s support for
prayer in public schools, said Warren’s gesture “was such a sharp
reaction to this [his father]. I think he did it as a political
statement.”
Bu ett also got involved in a path-breaking abortion case. Along
with Susie, who was active in Planned Parenthood, Warren
strongly favored legalizing abortions (then illegal in most states).
In 1969, the California Supreme Court had agreed to hear an
appeal from Leon Belous, a doctor convicted for referring a
woman to an abortionist. Charlie Munger had read about Belous in
the newspaper and called Bu ett, and the two immediately decided
to underwrite the appeal.
Munger turned Belous into a personal crusade. He organized two
friend-of-the-court briefs: one signed by 178 medical school deans
and professors, the other by seventeen prominent lawyers and
written by Munger himself. In September 1969, Belous won a
landmark victory—the rst time an abortion law had been
declared unconstitutional.62 ‡
From Bu ett’s angle, the Highland episode and Belous had
similar virtues. He characteristically sided with what he saw as
community interests over sectarian ones. In his rational,
stockpicker’s view, society’s stake in having open institutions and
in minimizing the number of unwanted babies outweighed the
narrower claims of segregationists and antiabortionists.
Aside from politics, Bu ett spent most of 1969 liquidating the
portfolio. His Uncle Fred, coincidentally, announced the closing of
Bu ett & Son, the family grocery begun precisely one hundred
years earlier. Appropriately enough, in the fall, Warren and Susie
threw a party with echoes of n de siècle. They invited 180 guests
and ew in sandwiches and racks of sausages from the Stage Deli.
The Bu etts’ door was illuminated by a string of ashing lights,
anked by a pair of three-foot Pepsi bottles. Politicians and

businessmen came, blacks and whites, “the moneyed and the still
struggling.”63 Women wore cocktail dresses, bell-bottoms, culottes,
and miniskirts. Partygoers painted the bodies of two scantily clad
girls in the solarium, and W. C. Fields and Mae West were featured
on the racquetball court, with popcorn served from a machine. A
guest said he hadn’t known that Omaha had “all these people.”
Meanwhile, Bu ett’s decision to quit had begun to look shrewd.
The Dow had hovered close to 1,000 until May. In June, it dipped
below 900. One by one, the high- iers crashed. Litton Industries—
hallmark of the conglomerate era—fell 70 percent from its peak;
Ling Temco-Vought, another, plunged from 169 to 25. Wall Street
brokerages closed their doors. The stock exchange slogan “Own
your share in American business” was dropped without
explanation.64 Performance funds were routed.
Fred Carr, anointed by Business Week in May, quit in December,
leaving the Enterprise Fund stu ed with illiquid letter stock. It
would fall 26 percent in 1969 and by more than 50 percent before
the carnage stopped.65 Cortes Randell’s National Student
Marketing was modestly revalued, from 140 to 3½, taking the
Harvard endowment along for the ride.§ The Dow Industrials
closed out 1969 at an even 800. And the slaughter went on. By
May 1970, a portfolio of every share on the stock exchange was
down by half from the start of 1969.66 Four Seasons Nursing Center
—darling of the ’68 garbage market—fell from 91 to 32. Electronic
Data Systems plunged 50 points on a spring day—reducing the
fortune of its Napoleonic founder, H. Ross Perot, by a cool $445
million. The Ford Foundation portfolio was shattered, forcing
McGeorge Bundy to swallow a severe helping of humble pie.‖
Bu ett eked out a 7 percent gain in 1969, the partnership’s nal
at-bat. It was an o year, but it topped the Dow by 18 percentage
points. The long-prophesied down year had never come. He had
made a pro t and beaten the benchmark in every season.
Had an investor put $10,000 in the Dow in 1957, his total pro t
over thirteen years would have amounted to $15,260. The same
grubstake, if invested in the partnership, would have produced a
pro t—after
deducting
Bu ett’s
share—of
$150,270.67

Alternatively, Bu ett’s portfolio grew at a compound annual rate
of 29.5 percent, compared to 7.4 percent for the Dow. One might
look for metaphors to other realms—in music, Mozart; in baseball,
the 1927 Yankees. In the world of investing, there had never been
anything like it.
Investment companies tried to buy his partners list, but Bu ett
turned them down.68 However, there remained the matter of where
his former investors would put their dough. Bu ett gave them just
one name: Bill Ruane, the straight-arrow from Graham’s class, who
was setting up the Sequoia Fund, a new mutual. Many of Bu ett’s
partners invested in it.
Bu ett said he would put much of his own money in municipal
bonds, and he wrote a long last letter o ering to help his partners
do the same (but making it clear that he would not be o ering
continuing investment counsel). The letter was, at turns, informal,
discursive, and highly detailed. At one point—recall that it was
ve years before any glimmer of New York City’s nancial trouble
—Bu ett interrupted his train of thought with a cautionary aside:
You will notice I am not buying issues of large cities. I don’t have the faintest idea
how to analyze a New York City, Chicago, Philadelphia, etc. (a friend mentioned the
other day when Newark was trying to sell bonds at a very fancy rate that the Ma a was
getting very upset because Newark was giving them a bad name). Your analysis of

New York City—and I admit it is hard to imagine them not paying their bills for any

extended period of time—would be as good as mine. My approach to bonds is pretty
much like my approach to stocks. If I can’t understand something, I tend to forget it.69

The partnership liquidated all but two of its investments:
Berkshire Hathaway and Diversi ed Retailing, the latter a holding
company for the Ben Rosner dress chain.a Thus, each partner could
take his proportional interests in Berkshire and Diversi ed in stock
or opt to cash out. Bu ett would take the stock:
I think both securities should be very decent long-term holdings and I am happy to
have a substantial portion of my net worth invested in them.70

He urged his partners to think of Berkshire, which was by far the
bigger of the two, as he did—as a business, rather than as a
“stock.” But his plans were a tri e obscure. On the one hand, he
didn’t think much of textiles; on the other, he liked the guy in
charge. He allowed that it ought to grow at 10 percent or so a
year, but avoided making a rm prediction. Moreover, though he
expected to play a role in setting policy at Berkshire, his partners
should understand that he was under no obligation “should my
interests develop elsewhere.”71
Sam Stayman, the bridge champ, gured that Bu ett had played
out his hand. He sold his Berkshire back to Bu ett at $43 a share.
But many partners hung on. They could not know what Berkshire
Hathaway would become, nor how deeply Bu ett was engaged in
remaking it. But Bu ett had made it plain that he was keeping his
Berkshire. As the loyal Doc Angle saw it, “That’s all anybody had
to hear if they had any brains.”
* Bu ett was also constrained by federal securities law, which restricts such partnerships to

ninety-nine partners. According to Dan Monen, his lawyer, he had far more than ninety-nine

people investing with him, but no more than ninety-nine “limited partners”—an end run
accomplished by lumping groups of investors into single entities. “It was within the letter of
the law,” Monen said. “I don’t know about the spirit.”

† Rosner stayed for twenty years. Toward the end of his tenure, he told Bu ett: “I’ll tell you
why it worked. You forgot you bought this business. And I forgot I sold it.”

‡ Two years later, Belous was cited in the appellants’ brief in Roe v. Wade as having
established “the fundamental right of the woman to choose whether to bear children.”
§ Randell would plead guilty to stock fraud. He was sentenced to eighteen months.
‖ Quoting from Bundy’s letter in the 1971 Ford Foundation Report: “These sober six years

have taught us a number of lessons.… in the mid-1960s we too easily allowed ourselves to

make larger commitments than hindsight would recommend. It was easy in 1965 and 1966 to

believe in the high long-term rates of total return on stocks, the low rates of total return on
bonds, and the modest rates of in ation that had been the general pattern for fteen years.
The last six years, to put it very gently, have been di erent.”

a Bu ett luckily managed to sell the Baltimore-based Hochschild to Supermarkets General
and get out without a loss.

Chapter 7

BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY

It was the fate of New Bedford, Massachusetts, to be cursed by
eeting prosperity not once but twice. Founded by Pilgrims, it
withstood a sacking by the British in the Revolutionary War and
then became the center of the world’s whaling trade. Its damp,
salt-drenched cobblestones led ever to the wharf, which gave New
Bedford a livelihood yet left the town at risk should whaling fall
upon the shoals. A local seaman—Herman Melville—said, “The
town itself is perhaps the dearest place to live in, in all New
England.” Yet whence had its riches sprung? “Go and gaze upon
the iron emblematical harpoons round yonder lofty mansion, and
your question will be answered.… One and all, they were
harpooned and dragged up hither from the bottom of the sea.”1
The whalers su ered losses in the Civil War, and they were
doomed by the drilling of the rst oil wells, in Pennsylvania. Yet if
New Bedford shuddered it did not collapse—thanks to a prescient
diversion of its capital. As early as 1847, a cotton mill, which
promoters said would reduce the city’s dependence on the sea, was
nanced by New Bedford whalers. A subsequent mill was named
for the whaler Acushnet, symbolizing the redirection of capital.
Ultimately, some $100 million was invested in textiles,2 so that

even as the harpoons were being laid to rest, ships were piling the
docks with bales of Southern cotton. By the early twentieth
century, New Bedford’s seventy mills were spinning more ne
cotton than any other city in the country.3
The salient lesson was that capital was mobile. Ships might rot,
but the pro ts need not be cast overboard with the captain’s lamp.
This, however, was a point that would haunt the city’s largest mill
for nearly one hundred years.
Hathaway Manufacturing Company was founded in 1888 by
Horatio Hathaway, whose family had operated China clippers
since the early 1800s. It was capitalized with $400,000, largely
from whalers, which was symbolically evident in its location on
Cove Street—smack against the sea. The New Bedford Evening
Standard boasted that the ambitious new venture would “employ
about 450 hands and run 30,000 spindles.” An original investor in
Warren Bu ett’s cotton mill was Hetty Green, the notorious miser
known by the sobriquet “Witch of Wall Street.”4 *
Hathaway’s fortunes, and the industry’s, rose with those of
cotton. Pro ts boomed during World War I, thanks to the military’s
demand for uniforms and airplane cloth. In New Bedford, thirty
thousand people—half of the labor force—worked in the mills.5
And then, quite suddenly, that industry also declined—or rather,
it ed south to cheap labor. In the twenties, New Bedford’s
workers, mostly immigrants, were forced to take repeated pay
cuts. In 1928, when the mill owners demanded a further 10 percent
cut, the workers struck, and remained on strike for an agonizing
ve months. Many mills did not reopen, and those that did were
soon leveled by the Depression. By 1940, the textile workforce had
shrunk to a pitiful nine thousand.6
What is notable is the way the mill owners coolly appraised their
dying industry. By the late twenties, though still earning
substantial pro ts, they were operating their plants with antique
machinery. Meanwhile, dividends were kept high—on the order of
10 percent.7 The owners siphoned their capital to mills down
South, to the stock market, to their yachts. Wherever the money
went, the owners had learned the lesson of the whalers well. Once

the industry was given up for dead, they did not reinvest in the
mills. All with the exception of one: Hathaway Manufacturing.
Hathaway was run by Seabury Stanton, a proud, proper New
Englander whose grandfather had captained a whaler and whose
father had been Hathaway’s president. Young Seabury, born in
New Bedford, graduated from Harvard in 1915, fought in France,
where he was promoted to second lieutenant, and returned after
the war to apprentice at Hathaway as its rightful heir. He would
stay there for half a century, until his encounter with Warren
Bu ett.
Stanton was six-foot-two and ramrod-straight. He was formal
and cool, with a stare that shot daggers. His de ning moment was
in 1934, at the height of the Depression. Mill after mill was folding
up or moving south. But Stanton, a sailor like his forebears, looked
into his soul and resolved to weather the storm. He conceived a
plan to modernize, and over the next decade and a half he plowed
$10 million of the company’s funds back into the mill. True to his
Yankee credo, Seabury and his brother, Otis, went into hock to buy
Hathaway stock on the noble belief that if the shareholders’ money
was to be at risk, their own money ought to be on the line as well.8
With Seabury at the helm, the red-brick mill on Cove Street gamely
withstood the economic tides.
There followed some ush years, some not so ush. Hathaway
branched into synthetic bers and pioneered in the manufacture of
rayon. The demand for parachute fabric in World War II gave it a
lift. After the war, Hathaway exploited rayon and became the
country’s, and perhaps the world’s, biggest producer of men’s suit
linings.9 † The trouble was, the product was easily imitable. It was
dogged by Southern and, increasingly, Far Eastern competition.
Then, in 1954, a hurricane ooded the plant, leaving it badly
damaged. Stanton got lucrative o ers to relocate to the South, but
the old skipper would not surrender. Unwilling to leave New
England, he decided to merge Hathaway with a northern
manufacturer as venerable as itself: Berkshire Fine Spinning
Associates, Inc.

Berkshire’s bloodlines could be traced to Samuel Slater, who had
built the country’s rst cotton mill in 1790. Oliver Chace, a
carpenter who had worked for Slater, had gone on to establish his
own mill, in Rhode Island, in 1806. Under Chace’s descendants, the
business had thrived.10 A century and a half later, the Chace family
still controlled Berkshire, now a sprawling collection of some
dozen plants making staple fabrics for sheets, shirts, handkerchiefs,
and slips.
Like Hathaway, Berkshire had been pro table in World War II
and its immediate aftermath and had endured tougher times since.
But Malcolm Chace, the president, had taken a wholly di erent
tack from Stanton. Whereas Hathaway had modernized and
branched into fashion, suit linings, and curtains, Berkshire, which
was based in Providence, was still running cottons on ancient
machinery. Chace—another white-haired, lean New Englander,
who had been in the business since 1931—felt the industry had
little future in New England and was running out the string. His
nephew, Nicholas Brady—later Secretary of the Treasury—
appraised Berkshire for his senior thesis at the Harvard Business
School in 1954 and concluded on such a glum note that he
promptly sold his stock.
The two companies merged in 1955, creating Berkshire
Hathaway, Inc. The new company was a colossus. It had fourteen
plants, twelve thousand workers, and yearly sales of $112 million.
There was some thinking that Hathaway’s more modern
management combined with Berkshire’s cash reserves would
produce a stronger whole. Headquarters were moved to New
Bedford, and Stanton was given the reins as president. Chace
became the chairman.
Stanton took one look at Berkshire, which was operating
thousands of looms attached to pulleys on the roof, and resolved to
modernize. He put in new spindles, rebuilt looms, increased their
speed, and consolidated the best of its plants.
There was a certain nobility to Seabury Stanton. In his own
mind, he was an extension of Samuel Slater, one of the
“imaginative men [who] found a way to link the tumbling river,

the turning wheel, the crude loom, and the thread, to clothe a
country.”11 He was forever guided by his experience in the
Depression, which he recalled as “a time when men stood alone,
upon their own resources and courage.”12 Under his stewardship,
Berkshire Hathaway became the largest—and, ultimately, the only
—surviving textile manufacturer of any size in New England.
But from an economic standpoint, he might as well have been
harpooning whales. According to one of his lieutenants, “Seabury
hadn’t the slightest concept of return on investment. He was
concerned with only one thing—keeping the plant going.”13 He
kept pouring money in, all the while low textile prices prevented
him from recouping his investment.
Within his management, Stanton was increasingly isolated. He
insisted on a regimen of argyle socks and white shirts for managers
and gloves and stockings for the secretaries, and woe to the
executive who dared appear in public in a sport jacket. Lord of his
manor, he communicated almost exclusively via written reports,
and he worked in a forbidding remove, known behind his back as
the “ivory tower.” According to Malcolm Chace:
Seabury had an o ce in the penthouse on the second

oor. No one could get in

without going past the executive secretary. She also had a secretary. When you got

called to his o ce you had to climb this long stairway. There was a door at the end, a
long conference table, and at the other end was Seabury’s desk.14

At noon, he would descend from the leather-appointed ivory
tower to a waiting black Cadillac, which would scoot him home for
lunch past the working-class wood-frame homes in the South End.
Though the mill was visible from his stairway, Stanton had little
contact with the rank and le. He saw the men on the night shift
once a year, at Christmas, when he somberly descended from the
ivory tower to shake their hands—hands that the workers had
mischievously coated with grease in anticipation of their boss’s
visit.
Seabury was also at odds with Otis, his brother. Otis vehemently
took issue with Seabury’s strategy of reinvesting in textiles, and

was similarly unhappy with Seabury’s insistence on holding down
wages at the expense of taking a strike.15 This division between
the brothers began to permeate the company.
Otis split his time between New Bedford and the company’s sales
o ce, in New York’s garment district. He was outgoing and warm,
and was largely responsible for the success of Hathaway’s fabled
rayon suit lining. It was Otis who marketed Hathaway’s synthetic
fabrics, including its linings, to “converters,” who dyed and
nished them and sold them to suit manufacturers. During the war,
when other suppliers had allocated scarce fabrics on the basis of
payola, Otis had remained honest. After the war, when supplies
became plentiful, his customers, who liked him anyway, paid him
back with their business.
However, Seabury, whose expertise was in manufacturing,
invaded Otis’s turf by setting up a new division to nish fabrics inhouse and sell directly to manufacturers—thus cutting out the
converters. This looked sensible in New Bedford but overlooked a
vital fact of the trade. The weaving business was gentile. The
converters were Jewish—as were the garment makers. “You had to
live with them to do business with them,” noted Stanley Rubin, a
Berkshire vice president for sales in New York. “That was the worst
mistake that Seabury made. It was the beginning of the end.”
Increasingly, Berkshire was a house divided. When Seabury
spoke about the industry’s glorious potential, the people in New
York, who marketed the company’s un nished fabrics—called
“grey goods”—snickered. They could see the business sinking
before their eyes. One time, a Berkshire salesman was with a
customer on Fifth Avenue, trying to sell handkerchief cloth. The
customer pointed out his window to the women going into Lord &
Taylor and said, “You see all those women carrying pocketbooks?
There is a box of Kleenex in every one. And that’s the end of the
handkerchief business.”16
By the end of 1961, Berkshire was down to seven plants. In the
previous three years alone, it had plowed $11 million back into the
business.17 And while its mills were enhanced, its business was not.
Its “regular plain weave” fabrics were commodities—

indistinguishable from those of any other manufacturer. When
competitors ooded the market, Berkshire was helpless. Thus, in
1962, the year that its modernization was complete, it su ered a
crushing $2.2 million loss.
By then, the blood feud between Seabury and Otis was boiling
over Seabury’s plan to pass the reins to his son. Jack Stanton was
tall, thin, and stony-faced, like his father, but his misty blue eyes
bespoke a sadness. Jack had followed Seabury to Harvard and into
a world war, and had thrown a couple of no-hitters in the marines.
The Philadelphia Athletics invited him to camp, but Seabury
forbade it. The dutiful son gave up baseball and went to work on
the looms, “shoulder to shoulder, all greased up.” By 1962, dour
Jack was treasurer. Seabury, then seventy, was planning to work a
few more years and make him president. Otis and Malcolm Chace
each thought Jack was unquali ed and secretly began to look for
someone else.
On Wall Street, Berkshire’s stock was out of favor. Richard N.
Tillison, a security analyst with Value Line, had recommended the
shares at the beginning of 1955, at a price of 14¾. From then on,
Tillison had su ered through years of oversupplied markets and
shuttered mills. By early 1963, the stock was at 8⅛—down 45
percent from his original call.
But hope in the breast of a textile analyst never dies. In March
1963, Tillison reported that the outlook for Berkshire “now appears
more promising than it has for a considerable time.” In June, he
crawled without his shell and predicted a modest quarterly pro t.
Alas, in September, he was forced to postpone his hopes once
more:
Berkshire is not now expected to break into the earnings column, as was earlier

thought possible, because the rapid movement of many cotton textile producers into
blended fabrics has caused temporary price weakness.…18

No pro t “now” on account of “temporary” weakness. And so it
had been for eight long years.

According to economic theory, when a company is so
mismanaged, sooner or later an investor will decide that he can do
more with its assets and take it over. It happened that Bu ett had
run across Berkshire at the same time as Tillison, when he was
working for Graham-Newman, in the 1950s.19 Howard Newman
had gone to look at Berkshire and had come close to making an
o er for it. Bu ett was merely an observer of the company’s
troubles until late in 1962, when the stock fell below $8 a share.
Since Berkshire had $16.50 per share of working capital, it seemed
to be a bargain, and Bu ett bought some stock, via his partnership.
However, he had no thought of a takeover. He approached it as he
did any other stock, assuming that he would hold for a couple of
years or so.
But with Bu ett’s interest piqued, Daniel Cowin, a New York
broker friend, found several large blocks of stock for him.20 By
1963, Bu ett Partnership was the company’s biggest shareholder.21
For a while, Bu ett was able to keep his identity as a shareholder
secret, and Cowin, playing the role of Bu ett’s stalking horse, took
a seat on Berkshire’s board.22
Then, word leaked out that Cowin’s client was Bu ett. Stanley
Rubin, the Berkshire sales executive, who knew Bu ett, called to
see if he was planning to buy more.
Bu ett said coyly, “I may or I may not.” Still, nobody seemed to
realize that Bu ett might be up to something.
A short time later, Bu ett visited the mill. When he found that
Jack Stanton had copies of Berkshire’s nancials going back to the
1920s, he got very excited and quickly made copies of them. Then
he asked to see some of the plants. Jack recalled, “I was very busy,
so we sent Ken Chace with him.”
This was the mistake of Jack’s life. Otis was already considering
Ken Chace (no relation to Malcolm) as a candidate to succeed
Seabury—though, of course, neither Seabury nor Jack, who coveted
the throne for himself, had any idea of it. Chace, an unpretentious
late-fortyish chemical engineer who drove a Chevrolet, was also a
local boy. He had attended something called the New Bedford
Textile School, joined Hathaway in 1947 to work on synthetic

bers, and worked his way up to the lofty position of vice
president of manufacturing.
For two days, the square-jawed Chace took Bu ett through the
mills. They must have looked to Bu ett like something out of
Samuel Slater’s sketchbook—the thick wads of cotton-candy raw
stock disappearing into giant hoppers, their bers being combed
into glossy, transparent webs, their ropelike strands being twisted
into yarn on hundreds of spinning frames, aligned like soldiers.
Whatever Bu ett grasped of it, there was something compelling in
their unsung industry, something close to the soul of New England.
According to Chace:
Warren asked questions like crazy. About the marketing, the machinery, about what I
thought should be done, where I thought the company was going, the technical end of
it, what kind of products were we selling, who we were selling to. He wanted to know
everything.

Chace spoke candidly about the company’s problems, and Bu ett
decided he had found his man. Bu ett didn’t say much, but when
the tour was over, he dropped an intriguing clue.
“I’ll be in touch with you, Ken.”
Meanwhile, Stanton nally sensed that he was under siege. In
1964, Berkshire made repeated o ers to buy back shares—thereby
raising the proportion of stock under Stanton’s control. Bu ett was
on the brink of selling out to him, but he thought that Stanton was
chiseling him on the price.
“They were three-eighths of a point apart” or Bu ett would have
sold, according to Charlie Munger. “It was an absolute accident
that Berkshire became his vehicle.”
As a corporate vehicle, Berkshire had nothing to recommend it.
But now, Bu ett, who felt that Stanton hadn’t been square with
him,23 was unwilling to step aside. He and Stanton were bitterly at
odds over an understanding that Bu ett felt had come undone—
though Bu ett, as usual, let someone else do his ghting.
Dan Cowin and Stanton had a heated argument over it in the
ivory tower. Stanton loudly proclaimed that no one would tell him

what to do. Knowing that Cowin was representing Bu ett, Edmund
Rigby, an executive vice president, rushed in and warned Stanton,
“You shouldn’t talk that way to a major shareholder.”
Events now rushed to a climax. Ken Chace, the plainspoken
executive who had shown Bu ett the plant, was so worried about
Berkshire’s future that he had been talking to a competitor in South
Carolina. Stanley Rubin called Chace early in 1965 and pleaded
with him to stay put. When Chace asked why, Rubin mysteriously
told him to take his word for it.
A month or so later, Rubin called again. “You remember that
Warren Bu ett fellow? He’s going to control Berkshire Hathaway.
He’s been holding stock under Street [brokerage-house] names.”
Rubin said Bu ett had something to discuss with Chace and wanted
Chace to meet him at the Plaza Hotel in New York.
It was one of the rst ne days of spring. Bu ett and Chace
walked to the little park in front, and Bu ett bought a couple of
ice cream bars on sticks.
Wasting no time, Bu ett said, “I’d like to have you become
president of Berkshire Hathaway. How do you feel about that?”
Chace was forty-eight. The man who was proposing to catapult
his career was thirty-four.
By the time Chace could blurt out his consent, Bu ett added that
he had enough stock to pull it o at the next directors’ meeting,
and that Chace should keep quiet in the meantime. As regards
Berkshire’s future, he said, “Figure out what you’ll need. It’ll be
your baby.” Bu ett was nished with him in ten minutes. Chace
left in a state of shock.
What he didn’t know was that Bu ett had gone to the chairman,
Malcolm Chace, and o ered to buy him out. Chace refused, citing
his long history with the company, but some of Chace’s family
agreed to sell.
Bu ett had one hill left to climb. Would Otis Stanton sell his
shares—and undermine his brother? Stanley Rubin set up a lunch
with Bu ett and Otis at the Wamsutta Club in New Bedford. After
Bu ett made his pitch, Otis agreed to sell—provided that Bu ett
make an equivalent o er to buy out Seabury. That was the break.

Though Jack was primed for a proxy ght, Seabury didn’t have the
stomach for it. With the Stantons’ shares, Bu ett Partnership
owned 49 percent of the stock, at an average cost of about $15 a
share.24
Jack Stanton, who had been too busy to show Bu ett the plant,
now realized—too late—that he ought to meet with him. Jack and
his then wife, Kitty, hurried to New York and had breakfast with
Warren and Susie at the Plaza. But Jack was awed, and in over his
head. According to Ralph Rigby, a fabric salesman, Kitty pled
harder than Jack did. Bu ett joked later, “If I had hired anybody, I
would have hired Kitty.”
Perhaps eager to change the subject, Bu ett told Jack about his
own career, recounting his rise as an investor. Jack asked, “How
do you do it?” Bu ett said he read “a couple of thousand” nancial
statements a year.
Shortly before the May board meeting, Bu ett was secretly
named a director.25 On the morning of his big takeover, Bu ett
ew into New Bedford, crew-cut, his suit tightly buttoned and
noticeably creased, with an attaché and an oversized valise and
something of the appearance of a down-at-the-heels but earnest
traveling salesman.
Bu ett made for the o ce on Cove Street, and Seabury emerged
from the ivory tower for a nal time. Calling the meeting to order,
Seabury read through the agenda, showing nothing. And then
Seabury Stanton resigned. It merely remained to pass the poison
cup to Jack. Without a word, the two stormed out of the elegant
wood-paneled boardroom. Ken Chace was voted president, Bu ett
chairman of the executive committee. Otis, in a nal stab at his
brother, voted with the majority and remained on the board.
Though Malcolm Chace retained the title of board chairman,
Bu ett was now in charge of Berkshire. The stock closed that day—
May 10, 1965—at $18 a share.
Bu ett’s tidy script was nearly wrecked when a messenger burst
in with a copy of the afternoon Standard-Times, revealing the
shake-up on the front page. Seabury had leaked the story, blaming
his departure on a rift with “certain outside interests.”26 Bu ett,

fearing he would be seen as a liquidator—the hated epithet from
Dempster Mill—was visibly enraged. But he papered it over in
public, praising the departing Stantons and soft-pedaling his plans.
Quoted in the next day’s edition, Bu ett promised “to sell the same
goods from the same plants to the same customers.”
Over the previous decade, Berkshire had closed all but two of its
mills and accumulated a net loss of $10.1 million.27 Its assets had
shrunk by half, and merely 2,300 workers—one of every ve from
the 1955 merger—remained. But its fortunes now seemed on the
mend. Demand for synthetics was strong, and the company was—
nally—in the black. One yearns to hear what Tillison would have
made of Bu ett’s arrival, but, alas, the dutiful analyst was benched
at the same juncture as Seabury Stanton. Value Line’s May report
on Berkshire was signed by a new analyst, who observed that the
plans of “the new controlling interest” were not known.
After the board meeting, Bu ett and Ken Chace strolled past the
historic mill and sat down to talk. Chace now made ready to hear
the new owner’s plans for the mill. But Bu ett said anything to do
with warps and looms would be up to Chace. Bu ett would watch
the money.
Then, in his blunt fashion, he outlined what each of them should
expect. The rst point was de ating: Bu ett would not approve of
stock options for Chace or for anyone else.
Bu ett opposed options for the reason that most CEOs were
enamored of them. Options conferred potential—sometimes vast—
rewards, but spared the recipients any risk, thus giving executives
a free ride on the shareholders’ capital.
More subtly, Bu ett wanted managers whose personal interests
were in line with those of the stockholders. A manager who owned
options, as distinct from shares, had nothing to lose, and would be
more inclined to gamble with the shareholders’ capital.
However, Bu ett o ered to cosign a loan so that Chace could
borrow $18,000 and buy a thousand shares. For Chace, who was
making less than $30,000, and who normally didn’t like to borrow
a shoelace, that was a huge amount. But Bu ett was a
supersalesman, especially when he was selling himself. Like some

of those early partnership investors, Chace had a feeling that good
things would happen with Bu ett in charge. Chace took the
plunge.
Then Bu ett explained to Chace the basic theory of return on
investment. He didn’t particularly care how much yarn Chace
produced, or even how much he sold. Nor was Bu ett interested in
the total pro t as an isolated number. What counted was the pro t
as a percentage of the capital invested. That was the yardstick by
which Bu ett would grade Chace’s performance.
To Chace, who had been reared, like most managers, to think of
growth as an absolute good, this idea was new. But he grasped that
it was pivotal to Bu ett’s capitalist credo, and Bu ett put it in
terms that Chace could understand.
“I’d rather have a $10 million business making 15 percent than a
$100 million business making 5 percent,” Bu ett said. “I have other
places I can put the money.” He ew back to Omaha that night.
Bu ett was serious about having “other places” to put the
money. He leaned on Chace to keep the inventory and overhead as
low as possible. As Chace said, “One thing Bu ett wanted was to
come up with cash quickly.”
Bu ett also followed through with his promise of autonomy. He
told Chace not to bother with quarterly projections and other timewasters. He merely wanted Chace to send him a monthly nancial
report and to warn him of any unpleasant surprises.
Indeed, Bu ett sculpted the relationship to get the most out of it
with a minimum of personal contact. He was easy to reach, but
this had the perverse e ect of restraining Chace from calling
except when he really needed to. And when Chace did call, Bu ett
didn’t linger on the phone.
“I’d give the results, and the estimate for the year, and he’d
remember them forever,” Chace noted.
Once, Bu ett said Chace had switched a gure from an earlier
call—which Chace disputed. After he checked his notes, Chace saw
that Bu ett was right. From then on, he carefully checked his data
before he called.

Chace’s freedom had one boundary. Only Bu ett could allocate
capital. And as most of the previous capital that Seabury had
poured into textiles had gone for naught, Bu ett was extremely
reluctant to put in more.
Still, Chace tried. He would propose an investment, backed by
careful research and good-looking projections. And Bu ett would
reply, “Ken, you won’t beat the historical average.”
J. Verne McKenzie, Berkshire’s treasurer, who had gotten to
know Bu ett as the outside auditor for Bu ett Partnership, said,
“Try to remember, Ken. Warren uses the same rule for measuring a
$5,000 investment as he does for $5 million.”
During the rst two years of the Bu ett/Chace regime, textile
markets boomed. Pro ts were earned; however, they were not
reinvested in textiles. Chace trimmed inventories and xed assets,
just as Bu ett had demanded. In a symbolic step, he abandoned the
ivory tower. And the company’s cash position grew.28 Bu ett paid
out a meager ten-cent dividend in 1967—but quickly thought better
of it. ‡ From then on, Bu ett hung on to the money—just as he said
he would.
To Berkshire’s shareholders, most of whom lived in New
England, there was no outward sign that the big decisions were
being made in Omaha. The headquarters remained in New
Bedford, and the annual reports were signed by Ken Chace and
Malcolm Chace. But a close reader of those reports might have
wondered at the hand behind the tiller.
The Company has been searching for suitable acquisitions within, and conceivably
without, the textile eld.29

Shortly after those words were written, Bu ett struck. For some
time, he had been studying an Omaha insurance rm, National
Indemnity Co. The majority owner was Jack Ringwalt, who had
once laughed o Bu ett’s request for a $50,000 investment in the
partnership. Since then, Ringwalt had heard about Bu ett’s record,
and Bu ett had learned a lot about Ringwalt.

A college dropout with a rogue wit, Ringwalt had started by
providing insurance for taxicabs in the Depression. This led him to
conclude that the way to make money was to write policies for
risks that other insurers did not want to touch.
This was particularly true in my case since my competitors had more friends, more
education, more determination, and more personality than I.30 §

His bread and butter was unusual-risk auto insurance, but
Ringwalt was willing to insure any risk—bootleggers, lion tamers,
you name it—that nobody else wanted, since the premiums on such
were typically higher. He was known for underwriting radio
station treasure hunts in cities around the country. Typically, a
station would broadcast a series of clues, hinting at the location of
a $100,000 bank draft. Ringwalt was liable if the draft was
discovered—quite unlikely, given that it was Ring-wait who hid
them, usually in a lipstick container underground. His clues were
obscure, along the lines of “A dandelion is not a rose; you are
within a block when you pass by Joe’s.”31 He had to pay up only
once, in San Francisco.
Ringwalt stated his philosophy in simple terms: “There is no such
thing as a bad risk. There are only bad rates.”32 This was an
insight worth its weight in gold. Bu ett, who had learned this truth
at the racetrack, felt that Ringwalt was another of his guys. Each
liked to take risks, but only when the odds favored them. Ringwalt
also was possibly the cheapest of the long line of tightwads in
Bu ett’s acquaintance. He even left his coat in the o ce when he
went downtown for lunch so as to avoid a coat check.
In 1967, Bu ett asked if Ringwalt could stop by Kiewit Plaza to
discuss a matter that Bu ett said would take only fteen minutes.
By then, Bu ett had learned from Charles Heider, an Omaha
broker, how much it would take to persuade Ringwalt to part with
National Indemnity.
“How does it happen that you never sold your company?”
Bu ett asked.
“Because only crooks and bankrupt people have wanted it.”

“What other reason?”
“I would not want the other stockholders to take less per share
than I would receive myself.”
“What else?” Bu ett prodded him.
“I would not want my employees to worry about losing their
jobs.”
“What else?” Bu ett insisted.
“I would want it to remain in Omaha.”
“What else?”
“Isn’t that enough?”
“What is your stock worth?” Bu ett asked, getting to the point.
“The market value is $33 per share, but the stock is worth $50
per share.”
“I will take it,” Bu ett said.33
The total price was $8.6 million. The apparent riddle was why a
New Bedford fabric mill would want to acquire an Omaha
insurance company. But Bu ett did not think of Berkshire as
necessarily a textile company, but as a corporation whose capital
ought to be deployed in the greenest possible pastures.
Whereas textiles, which required reinvestment in plant and
equipment, were cash-consuming, insurance was cash-generating.
Premiums were collected up-front; claims were paid out only later.
In the interim, an insurance company could invest the funds,
known in the trade as the “ oat.”
Traditionally, insurers had managed their oat conservatively,
keeping far more capital than needed. But Bu ett, who had
thought long and hard about insurance since his early ing with
GEICO, thought that oat from insurance could be as dynamic as
rocket fuel. Float was merely money, and an insurance rm was,
in e ect, a conduit for in-vestable cash.
Bu ett’s view would soon be a commonplace, but at the time,
insurance was a backwater.‖ Many insurance companies didn’t
even bother to publish their earnings, and few investors were
interested in seeing them. Charles Heider, who brokered the deal,
said, “Bu ett understood oat before anyone in the country.”

Once Bu ett had gobbled up National Indemnity, Berkshire had
a stream of funds for him to play with. In successive years,
Berkshire acquired Sun Newspapers of Omaha Inc., a group of
weekly papers in Omaha, and the far bigger Illinois National Bank
& Trust, in Rockford, Illinois. The Rockford bank was run by
Eugene Abegg, who had taken charge in 1931, when it was
virtually worthless and when other banks in town were failing. He
was another of the nose-to-the-grind-stone, Depression-schooled,
Grandpa Bu ett-type gures that Bu ett seemed to produce from
central casting whenever he bought a business. From his 1930s
beginnings, Abegg had proceeded to build a $100 million base of
deposits and an earnings-to-assets ratio (the key measure in
banking) that was close to the highest among large commercial
banks.34
Most older entrepreneurs such as Abegg are eager to retire when
they sell out, and the new owners (while praising their storied
careers) usually are anxious to show them the door. Bu ett was
di erent. Running a bank, a claims o ce, or a retail chain was out
of his arc, and he had no desire to try. Indeed, he felt, if he didn’t
like the way the business was run, why buy it?
He looked for a type: the self-starter with a proven record. What
is interesting is that they stuck with him. Abegg, who was seventyone when he sold to Bu ett, continued to manage under Bu ett’s
ownership—as did Jack Ringwalt at National Indemnity and Ben
Rosner at Diversi ed. (Abegg would run the bank until he was
eighty.)
None of these multimillionaires needed to work, but Bu ett
understood that most people, regardless of what they say, are
looking for appreciation as much as they are for money. He made
it clear that he was depending on them, and he underlined this by
showing admiration for their work and by trusting them to run
their own operations.
One time, a discontented fabric buyer at Sears, Roebuck called
Bu ett and tried to pull an end run around Ken Chace. The buyer
reminded Bu ett that they had a common friend from college, and
asked him to change the salesman on his account. Bu ett despised

the old-boy routine (it appealed to sentiment, not reason) and
bluntly told the man from Sears that such matters were up to
Chace.35 Naturally, such shows of loyalty only increased Chace’s
dedication to Bu ett.
But as Bu ett plowed Berkshire’s capital into insurance,
banking, and publishing, he continued to siphon it out of textiles.
In 1968—three years after promising to sell the same goods from
the same plants—he closed the smaller of Berkshire Hathaway’s
mills, in Rhode Island, which was irreversibly tied to cotton fabrics
and was doomed by the dwindling market for such niceties as
petticoats and dress sti eners. The onetime king of cotton was
down to a single mill—the factory in New Bedford. A year later,
even the Cove Street plant stopped spinning cotton, the business
launched by Horatio Hathaway, leaving only rayon linings and
synthetic curtains.
And Bu ett was keeping his thumb on every capital outlay down
to the o ce pencil sharpener. The minutes of Berkshire’s “ nance
committee”—convened, one summer, over the telephone between
New Bedford and Bu ett’s vacation haunt in California—suggest
that no expense was too tri ing to escape his scrutiny:
Voted: To approve the purchase of a secondhand Reiner Warper and Creel at an
approximate cost of $11,110.

Voted: To approve the purchase of 50 secondhand 64 inch XD looms at an
approximate cost of $71,160, installed.

Voted: To approve the repair of o ce building roofs at an approximate cost of $9,340,
and the repair of the shipping room oor at an approximate cost of $9,940.36

Corresponding with Chace on the risk of deadbeats, Bu ett
speci cally reminded him not to trust in anything but cash:
Also, let’s look at all of our customers especially hard so that no one gets into us too
heavily. If anyone is slow in paying, let’s make sure we don’t ship them more goods
until they pay whatever amount is past due, and the check has cleared.37

Bu ett made no exceptions, even for a very “special” customer.
Susie came to Berkshire’s New York o ce in the early seventies to
buy some draperies. Ralph Rigby, the salesman, said, “We gave her
the highest price we could. It was a good thing. Bu ett called and
asked what we had charged.”
In 1970, with the dissolution of Bu ett Partnership, Bu ett
personally became the owner of 29 percent of Berkshire’s stock. He
installed himself as chairman and, for the rst time, composed the
letter to shareholders in Berkshire’s annual report.
Writing to the investors, Bu ett used the same yardstick as he
had in private with Ken Chace: the return on equity capital—that
is, the percentage pro t on each dollar invested. Bu ett was
extremely consistent abut such things. He did not have one
yardstick in Kiewit Plaza, another in New Bedford, and another for
the public.
Moreover, in measuring investments, Bu ett was absolutely
unwilling to relax his standards. Many a portfolio manager has
been known to explain, “This doesn’t look so hot, so we’re only
investing a little.” Bu ett refused to make such compromises, and
he could be brutally honest about shooting down a prospect. Scotty
Hord, his Omaha Data Documents cohort, discovered this in the
period that Bu ett was reinventing Berkshire. Hord had gotten a
cash windfall, and he was hoping to buy a business of his own.
Bu ett o ered to check out any prospects before he went ahead.
Hord recounted:
I brought him four or

ve companies. I went to his house each time. One of them

made a new product—a kind of dispenser of thin sheets of paper for hospitals,

restaurants. They wanted me to put up $60,000. Bu ett said, “What do you think the
odds of this thing making it are?” I said, “Pretty good. One out of two.” He said, “Do
you think that’s good? Why don’t you go up in an airplane with a parachute that

opens one out of every two times and jump?” I brought him another one—Jubilee
Manufacturing Co. It made novelty automobile horns. I said, “Do you think enough of

it to invest with me?” He said, “No.” I said, “Do you think enough of me to invest in it
with me?” He said: “No.” He said it that quick. It was so refreshing to hear, without
all kinds of excuses.

Bu ett increasingly believed that textiles amounted to the same
sort of wishful parachute drop. No matter how much they invested,
manufacturers couldn’t raise prices, because the product was a
commodity and usually in oversupply. Thus they never recouped
their investment.
In 1970, Berkshire’s pro ts from textiles were a laughable
$45,000. Meanwhile, it earned $2.1 million from insurance and
$2.6 million from banking, both of which, at the start of the year,
were working with roughly the same amount of capital as textiles.
In his annual report, Bu ett saluted Ken Chace’s attitude and
e ort, but noted that textiles were “swimming against a strong
tide.” Pointedly, he noted that Berkshire’s return was 10 percent,
merely average for corporate America, and that “it is considerably
in excess of what would have been achieved had resources
continued to be devoted exclusively to the textile business.”38
Of course, the question of whether Bu ett, an outsider, would
close the mill had hung over him from the start. Malcolm Chace
claimed that he knew from day one that Bu ett “didn’t have any
intention of putting more money into the brick and mortar of
textiles.” Jack Stanton, watching bitterly from the sidelines,
concluded that Bu ett was merely a liquidator.
But from time to time Bu ett did reinvest modest amounts. He
did not want to be known for closing New Bedford’s last mill. In a
nal letter to his partners he had written:
I like the textile operating people—they have worked hard to
improve the business under di cult conditions—and, despite the
poor return, we expect to continue the textile operation as long as
it produces near current levels.39
He felt a debt to Ken Chace, who had provided him the cash to
diversify, and in whom Bu ett saw the qualities he most admired:
frankness and self-reliance. Once, when Chace put himself down,
Bu ett threw him a look. He said, “Ken, you worked your way up
from nothing.”
He was stingy about paying Chace, who made less than
competitors at other textile mills.40 In 1970, after Chace had been
at the helm for ve years, his salary was $42,000 a year. Also,

Bu ett tightened up considerably—as did other textile companies—
on the pension plan. “Warren had a strong negative feeling about
management bene ting at the expense of shareholders,” Chace
noted.
Yet Chace deeply appreciated his autonomy under Bu ett and
was extremely devoted to him. This says a lot about Bu ett’s e ect
on people. Though he wouldn’t loosen his wallet, he was uncanny
as a motivator.
Chace wondered whether Bu ett would shut him down, but he
sensed that his overseer did not want the tumultuous upheaval of a
mill closing. Bu ett, he knew, did not like change. “Warren tends
to hang on,” Chace noted. “He keeps his old friends.”
According to Bu ett’s capitalist credo, he probably should have
closed the mill. But viscerally, he felt an a ection for this relic of a
factory, whose past seemed oddly more alive than its future.41 He
was willing to tolerate a mediocre return, as long as the mill didn’t
become a drain on cash and require him to put in more capital.
Spiritually, though no longer nancially, the Hathaway mill
embodied the New England work ethic that Bu ett revered. So
Bu ett made a Faustian pact between his conscience, his comfort,
and his wallet. Textiles would be bled to the bone, but the looms
on Cove Street would continue to hum.
* Green, a shipping heiress, was said to have wrapped herself in papers to keep warm in the
winter. She died in 1916, reputedly the world’s richest woman, with a $100 million fortune.
† The company had no relation to Hathaway shirts.
‡ Bu ett later said, “I must have been in the bathroom” when the dividend was declared. He
never paid another.

§ Ringwalt’s memoir, Tales of National Indemnity Company and Its Founder, is a hilarious
romp past the characters, not always savory, in the back alleys of the insurance business.
‖ Within a year or two of the National Indemnity deal, Bu ett was imitated by

nancial

operators such as Saul Steinberg, Carl Lindner, Harold Green, Maurice Greenberg, and Larry
Tisch, all of whom pursued insurance-company takeovers.

Chapter 8

RETURN OF THE NATIVE

Now is the time to get rich.
WARREN BUFFETT, 1974

Coming o the golf green with his chum Bob Billig in the summer
of 1970, Bu ett noticed a commotion by the club patio and asked
what was going on. “That’s your fortieth birthday celebration,
watching us,” Billig said dryly. As Bu ett stood uncertainly, the
crowd approached, bursting into the familiar refrain. Though he
kept his composure, Bu ett was deeply touched. Now at midlife, he
was mildly celebrated. In Omaha, he was a somebody: chairman of
the weekly Sun, a director of the Omaha National Bank. As a
visitor observed on a walk through downtown Omaha, Bu ett
could “rattle o the nancial characteristics of every building and
business he passes.”1
Yet with his partnership liquidated, Bu ett no longer had a fulltime job. Keeping a vigil over Ken Chace and the Hathaway mill
took only so much time. His three children were teenagers. A
pro le in the Lincoln Journal & Star portrayed him as a man in
limbo, monitoring his investments from a four-room suite and
living a “pretty easy life.” To a younger money manager who had

sought his counsel, Bu ett curtly replied, “I am no longer in the
investment management business and, therefore, have had to
decline all requests, including yours”—sounding as if Wall Street
were not to hear from him again.2
After his fortieth birthday, Bu ett reconvened the Graham group,
in Williamsburg, Virginia, this time without Graham. Oddly, Bu ett
was the only one not active in stocks. The market was
unattractively high, and he was asking quite natural questions—
such as, with $25 million, what was the point of accumulating
more? Writing in Fortune, his friend Carol Loomis said Bu ett had
“a strong feeling that his time and wealth should now be directed
toward other goals than simply the making of more money.”3 Bill
Ruane urged him to run for President.
In fact, Bu ett was thinking seriously of public service. He did
not want to run; he was far too private—and, he admitted, thinskinned—for that carnival test.4 But he was dabbling backstage.
He supported Democratic presidential hopefuls, such as Harold
Hughes and Allard Lowenstein. He was getting chummy with
politicians, such as Senators Frank Church and Richard Clark and
Governor Jay Rockefeller. Geo rey Cowan, a Village Voice writer,
had dinner at the Bu etts’ along with John Culver, a candidate for
U.S. senator. Strangely, the talk at this multimillionaire’s dinner
table was all about liberal politics.
Howard Bu ett had championed America as a nished product,
as a sort of perfect, closed society unneedful of change. Warren,
who had the American sympathy for the underdog, identi ed with
the up-and-coming Ben Rosners and Ken Chaces. Like his father, he
hated free riders (e.g., his disdain for stock options), but he saw
more of them within the country clubs and boardrooms than
without. Once, at a formal dinner, when a guest complained about
the cost of welfare programs for the poor, Bu ett replied tartly,
“I’m a lot more concerned about welfare for the rich.”5
This was re ected in Bu ett’s lifestyle. He lived more or less on
the $50,000 salary that he received from Berkshire. His children
went to public schools, and Warren encouraged them to do
something that they enjoyed, irrespective of what they would earn.

In fact, Peter realized the extent of his father’s fortune only when
he read of it in the newspaper. Young Susie said:
We didn’t live any di erently from anyone else. I could charge clothes and never get in
trouble—that was the only di erence. I didn’t have a car. I had to get a job at sixteen—
at the Carriage Shop, as a salesperson.

Bu ett generally tried to make light of his money. When his
wealth attracted publicity, alarming his family, Bu ett joked,
“We’ll just put a sign on the door that says it’s Bill Scott’s [his
assistant’s] night to keep the money.” Or, he would crack, “And to
Peter, who wants to be mentioned in my will: ‘Hi, Pete!’ ” Of
course, this was not really a joke. Warren had strong feelings
about his money and warned his kids that they should not expect a
penny of it. He seemed to fear that even a droplet of his money
would spoil them.
This may have been obsessive, but as a consequence, the Bu ett
household had an unmoneyed, informal spirit and an egalitarian
air. At a Halloween apple-bobbing party, the Bu etts invited in
every passing trick-or-treater—a gesture one would not have
expected from a J. P. Morgan or a Henry Kravis.6 People dropped
in unannounced to use Bu ett’s racquetball court, and in such
numbers that he took to calling it the “YMCA.”
Under the in uence of the hip elder Susie, the house became a
refuge from Woodstock-era generational con ict. Layne Yahnke, a
friend of little Susie’s, said it was a “safe house.” People could just
walk in and raid the fridge. “If the snow fell and the city stopped—
that’s where you went,” Yahnke recalled. “Sitting in the family
room was so damned nice.”
Susie had done the house in her trademark sunshiny oranges and
yellows. There were paintings by artists that she had taken under
her wing, and Aquarius-age posters such as the ubiquitous War Is
Unhealthy for Children and Other Living Things. The man of the
family might come down to make some popcorn, but—“retired”
from money management or not—he was generally upstairs,
working. Again, Layne Yahnke:

Saturday nights the family room would be full of kids. Mrs. Bu ett would be there;
we’d be playing our music for her; she’d be playing music for us. Long about twelve-

thirty in the morning you’d hear “Susan-O—you coming up?” There were never any
rules. When he went to bed, we turned down the music.

In 1971, “big Susie” talked Warren into buying a $150,000
vacation home in Laguna Beach, south of Los Angeles. It was near
the ocean but not fronting it, as the more expensive homes were,
and was casually furnished with rattan chairs. The rst summer,
thirteen teenagers stayed there. Bu ett would get a daily package
of papers from his o ce and go o by himself, but he was pretty
tolerant of his kids’ friends. One evening he took a big crew of
them to dinner. After the meal, the waiter came back with his
credit card and said, “You’re at your limit.” Bu ett arched his
eyebrows at his wife and handed the waiter a second card, without
so much as a word to suggest that he was, indeed, good for the
bill.7
While Warren was pondering a political role for himself, Susie
was spending a lot of time in north Omaha, the black quarter (and
the birthplace of Malcolm X). Besides being president of a local
volunteer agency, she would make the rounds of schools and
always seemed to have an errand or a mission on the north side.
(Tom Rogers, a nephew, satirized her thusly: “Oh, are you black?
Are you poor?—How much do you need?”)
Encouraged by Susie, Warren put his toe in the water. Their
private trust, the Bu ett Foundation, began to provide more than
fty scholarships a year to black college students.8 In the early
seventies, Rodney Wead, a friend of Susie’s who was promoting
black-run business ventures, asked Warren to get involved. In
particular, Wead, who had visions of “black capitalism,” thought
Bu ett would be just the guy to help him get his Community Bank
of Nebraska o the ground.
Bu ett agreed. He and Nick Newman (his country-club coconspirator) joined the bank’s advisory board and devoted a fair
amount of time to it. Bu ett also made a nominal investment—1.4
percent of the bank’s capital.9 However, unlike Susie, Warren was

far from an innocent. He repeatedly warned the bank’s directors
that a disproportionate number of minority banks had failed
because of bad loans. As the bank was getting under way, Bu ett
sent the board a nervous note, enclosing a copy of a newspaper
story about a similar bank in Denver that had failed.
You will notice that the President of the bank said, “When we started business, it was
our plan to aid minority investors and the so-called little guy. This we did, but some of

them didn’t treat us very well in paying their debts, and that was our downfall.” The
President is making a mistake in blaming the borrower. Every bank gets o ered lots of
bad loans, and it is the banker’s fault if he accepts them.10

When the Community Bank began to ounder, Bu ett distanced
himself. Wead suggested that Bu ett take some black students
under his wing and teach them nance, but Bu ett did not
respond. “Warren is an enigma,” Wead concluded. “He’s gracious.
He’s honest. He’s hardworking. But he’s never understood his role
as a wealthy man in our beleaguered community.” When bad loans
mounted—just as Bu ett had feared—he pointedly refused to
invest more capital.11
Wead complained that Bu ett “didn’t understand the cycle of
poverty.” The truth was to the contrary. Bu ett understood the
cycle well enough to keep his wallet zipped. Without the hope of a
return, he was no more willing to invest in the Community Bank
than he was in textiles.
Despite his ideals, Bu ett was suspicious of the liberal impulse to
simply spend money. George McGovern, then running for the
Democratic presidential nomination, stayed at Bu ett’s house and
seemed to win Bu ett’s favor—until, soon after, he announced that
a President McGovern would favor giving each person in the
United States a $1,000-a-year stipend. Bu ett dropped him like a
hot potato and voted for Richard Nixon.12
Partly, Bu ett was just tight, but he genuinely did not think
people or organizations (or his kids) bene ted from easy cash. He
measured social projects through the same lens as business
ventures: he wanted a return. Good works required that one

proceed on the basis of trial and error, even on faith. Bu ett was
incapable of such a leap. Indeed, the very discipline that made him
a good investor crippled what could have been a powerful
inclination to work for societal changes. He needed a yardstick. “In
investment you can measure results,” he admitted to a reporter.
“With some of this other stu , you don’t know in the end whether
you’ve won or lost.”13
Like many another mogul, Bu ett thought he would be able to
play both the citizen and the capitalist in publishing. Jay
Rockefeller had introduced him in the late sixties to Charles Peters,
a former Peace Corps administrator who was starting a magazine,
the Washington Monthly. The Monthly espoused just the hardheaded
liberalism Bu ett admired. He invested $32,000 and brought in Joe
Rosen eld, a liberal friend from Des Moines, as a partner. Full of
high-minded ideals, Bu ett told Rosen eld, “It’ll be interesting and
if it breaks even it’ll be worth it.”
Peters immediately blew his capital. Bu ett and Rockefeller took
it upon themselves to go to New York and hire a consultant to see
if the magazine was worth saving. Concluding that it was, Bu ett
agreed to put in $50,000 more. Then he began to doubt whether it
would, as he had said, be “worth it.” He called Peters and told him
he wanted out—which would have been a death blow. The fasttalking Peters assured him that the Monthly would be a big
breadwinner, which neither of them believed. They went back and
forth on the telephone, Bu ett referring to his accursed numbers,
Peters desperately trying to reel him in. Finally, Bu ett agreed.
The amount of money was trivial, but as Ken Chace had learned,
that didn’t matter. “Warren wanted annual reports—all that shit,”
Peters noted. The Monthly was precisely the editorial voice that
Bu ett had hoped for—in uential and at times ground-breaking.
But as a business the Monthly was a joke. Though it was
understa ed and run on a shoestring (Peters earned $24,000),
Bu ett was most annoyed because Peters didn’t produce an annual
report. Even in a venture that couldn’t possibly make a buck, he
needed that yardstick.

Bu ett complained to Rosen eld, “They talk about open
government but they don’t send statements.” Peters said that
Bu ett was “torn—between his pro bono side, and his side that
didn’t want it on his tombstone that he had invested capital in the
Washington Monthly.”
Bu ett did care about the journalism. In 1971, he called the
Monthly with what he said was a pretty hot tip. Two young editors
rejected it, reckoning that if it came from a millionaire it wouldn’t
be much good. 14
Then Bu ett took the story to the Sun, the group of Omaha-area
weekly papers that he had purchased for Berkshire. Stanford
Lipsey, the publisher, and Bu ett were pretty chummy. Lipsey
would go over to Bu ett’s and, lique ed with Pepsi-Colas, the two
would talk for hours about how to improve the paper and how to
use it as a social force in Omaha. They had tried their hand at
kingmaker, vigorously pushing a candidate for mayor (who lost).
One time, Bu ett called Lipsey to tell him that an editorial on
President Nixon’s wage-and-price controls was terri c. “Warren,
you gave it to me,” Lipsey reminded him.
Bu ett’s tip concerned Boys Town, a revered Omaha institution.
It had been founded in 1917 by Edward J. Flanagan, an Irish
priest, as a home for wayward youths, and celebrated in an Oscarwinning 1938 movie starring Spencer Tracy. Bu ett had a source
who told him that Boys Town was sitting on a ton of money and
was straying pretty far from Father Flanagan’s dream.15
The story was tailor-made for the Sun, a feisty paper but a weak
second ddle to the Omaha World-Herald. And Bu ett gave Lipsey a
crucial lead: Boys Town had been required, for the rst time, to le
an independent tax return.16 The return showed that Boys Town
had accumulated an astonishing $162 million investment portfolio
—twice the endowment of the University of Notre Dame.
Meanwhile, it was serving fewer boys and operating a hearttugging direct-mail campaign under the guise of poverty.
This was the sort of story that red Bu ett’s conscience. He
invested a godlike faith in capital, because any amount of it, even

Queen Isabella’s pittance, bore the seeds of future trillions. To
squander or misdirect it was a sin.
The Boys Town project was reported in secret, and Bu ett,
Lipsey, and the editor proofread the eight-page exposé in the
editor’s living room. Bu ett topped the story with a line from
scripture (Luke 16) that could have been his refrain for anyone in
public life, or in business, who had misused capital: “Give an
account of thy stewardship.”
The story, published in March 1972, won a Pulitzer Prize.
Bu ett liked newspapers. He was nostalgic about his boyhood
exploits as a Washington Post carrier; he liked the inky feel of
newspapers. But he was dissatis ed with the Omaha Sun. Like
other quasi-social ventures, such as the Community Bank and the
Washington Monthly, the Sun didn’t quite cut it for him. Though he
was proud of the Pulitzer, he wanted a pro t.
And the Sun was a poor business. When it raised its rates, its
circulation dropped, rather sharply. “Warren didn’t anticipate
that,” Lipsey noted. The experience seems to have jolted him.
Bu ett suddenly wanted to learn all there was to know about
newspapers. He began to study the economics of newspapers, and
of other media properties, in great detail. As once, after
discovering GEICO, he had immersed himself in insurance, now he
wouldn’t sleep until he knew the newspaper business from the
bottom up. And the more he learned, the more he knew that the
Sun, as a secondary paper, was hopeless. Not long after the Boys
Town story, Bu ett wrote to a colleague:
I mentioned that in 1910 there were 1207 cities in the country with daily papers, of
which 689 had two or more competing papers. In 1971, there were 1511 cities with

daily papers, of which 37 had two or more competing papers. Since I wrote that
letter, the Washington Daily News, backed by the enormously powerful ScrippsHoward chain, has folded, as has the Boston Herald-Traveler and the Newark Evening

News.… The owners learned by bitter experience that having a paper which is second
in consumer acceptance and community importance produced rivers of red ink which
the best of management and the deepest of pocketbooks cannot reverse.

Referring to the Omaha Sun, Bu ett emphasized that socially
redeeming stories would in no way guarantee a pro t.
Suggestions are constantly made to me—frequently by academicians who are

somewhat unhappy with the editorial views of the local monopoly daily—that a
wonderful future would await us if we would convert to a daily paper. This advice is

well intended and sincere. The inescapable fact that it has never been done … doesn’t
register on these theoreticians.17

But it had registered on Bu ett that it would be “wonderful”
indeed to own a dominant newspaper. Such a paper, he would tell
his pals, would be like the only bridge in a small town.18 Anyone
who had to get across would have to pay the toll. An advertiser in
a one-paper city was in the same boat. A department store in
Omaha had to advertise in the Omaha World-Herald, the monopoly
daily—which meant that the paper had relative freedom to raise its
rates. It had the protected franchise that lesser businesses, such as
the Hathaway mill, could only dream of.
Bu ett would have liked to buy the World-Herald, but it was not
for sale.19 So he began to nose around in publishing circles, trying
to nd a paper. He checked out possibilities in California and
Maryland. He made a bid for the Cincinnati Enquirer, but got turned
down.
He also got Bill Ruane to set up a dinner with Tom Murphy, a
Harvard classmate of Ruane’s. Murphy was chairman of Capital
Cities Communications and a rising star in the broadcasting
business. The two of them hit it o . Murphy took Bu ett to the
Republican Convention in Miami and decided he wanted to get
Bu ett on his board. Taking a tip from Ruane, Murphy went to
Omaha, where he could see Bu ett without distractions.
They had “a hell of a game of racquetball,” after which Bu ett
bought Murphy a steak dinner. Sensing Murphy’s purpose, Bu ett
never let him pop the question.
“You know, Murph,” he said, “I couldn’t become a director of
your company without a major position, and your stock’s much too
high. But any way I can help, you feel free to call me.”

High stock prices had been a problem for Bu ett all around.
Since folding the partnership, he had not been able to nd
bargains. Going into 1972, Berkshire’s insurance company had a
portfolio worth $101 million, of which only $17 million was
invested in stocks. Bu ett had put the rest in bonds.
But little by little, he began to creep back into the game. Once
again, the catalyst for his metamorphosis was Wall Street. Fund
managers, who had been stunned by the collapse of Go-Go, had
retreated into a shell. Their funds were now clustered in a group of
big, well-known growth stocks, such as Xerox, Kodak, Polaroid,
Avon, and Texas Instruments, which were dubbed the nifty fty. In
the prevailing view, these companies, unlike the small high- iers
of the Go-Go era, would grow forever. They were thus said to be
“safe”—indeed, safe at any price.
By 1972, the nifty fty were trading at an astronomical eighty
times earnings. Wall Street had drawn a moral from Go-Go, but
not the right one. The funds had converged on “safer” stocks, but
risk is never wedded to one stock or another; it is present wherever
investors mindlessly imitate one another.
Bu ett, meanwhile, began to nd bargains outside the nifty
fty, and to buy them for Berkshire’s insurance company. One day
it was California Water Service, the next 1st Citizens Bank & Trust
of Smith- eld, then General Motors. And there were more: ScrippsHoward Investment, Cleveland Cli s Iron, Vornado, the Omaha
National.
In 1973, the nifty fty began to crack. Fund managers recoiled
in horror. The “safe” stocks were falling. Where was one to turn?
The Dow, which had broken above 1,000, backpedaled to 950. The
broad market staggered. Wall Street, now thoroughly cured of the
mania of Go-Go, retreated into a malaise. Brokerage reports dried
up; analysts were sent packing. Companies that had gone public in
1969 saw their stocks fall by half.
This spiritual anemia produced a corresponding but contrary
reaction in Bu ett. His transformation was uncannily familiar and
yet inverted, like a lmstrip of the previous decade being run in
reverse. In the Go-Go years, his ideas and desire had slowly

drained, but now, with the market sinking, he was running like a
colt.
Looking over Berkshire’s brokerage activity in 1973, one has an
impression of Bu ett sweeping down the aisles of a giant store—
here grabbing National Presto Industries, there Detroit
International Bridge, in the other lane Sperry & Hutchinson.20 On
it went—U.S. Truck Lines, Munsingwear, Handy & Harman. As the
market fell, he raced down the aisles all the faster—J. Walter
Thompson, Coldwell Banker, Dean Witter, King’s Department
Stores, Morse Shoe, Ford Motor, Pic N Save, Mitchum Jones &
Templeton, Grand Union, Studebaker-Worthington.
Ralph Rigby, the textile salesman, visited Omaha and found
Bu ett in a state of ecstasy. “He said a lot of guys studied baseball
stats or the Racing Form,” Rigby said, “He just had a hobby that
made him money. That was relaxation to him.”
One time, Judge John Grant, Bu ett’s bridge partner, mentioned
that he had been having fun trying an interesting case. Bu ett’s
eyes twinkled. “You know,” he said, “some days I get up and I
want to tap-dance.”
In the evenings, Bu ett would go to Cris Drugstore, on 50th
Street, for the late edition of the World-Herald, which carried the
closing stock prices. Then he would go home and read a stack of
annual reports. For anyone else it would have been work. For
Bu ett it was a night on the town.
He did not merely do this nine-to- ve. If he was awake, the
wheels were turning. He would o er to help Peter with his
homework, but Peter knew it wasn’t what his father really wanted
to do.21 One day, when Bu ett arrived home, he found his
adolescent son wincing in pain on the stair landing. Peter had
thrown his back out while changing a lightbulb. Bu ett, in his
customary haste to get to his study, blew past him up the stairs.
Later, he realized how unfeeling he had been, and apologized.
In a sense, Bu ett was the boy of the house. His total delight in
his work to the exclusion of all else, like his unre ned and
immature eating habits, his fear of change, his dependence on
Susie, even his perpetual energy and good humor, had a juvenile

quality not uncommon to prodigies. A woman friend said that
when she was with him, she felt as if they were “kids shooting
marbles.”22
His immersion in stocks was terribly di cult for his wife, in
manifold ways. According to what Susie told her con dantes, she
yearned for more of the usual sort of sharing that one would have
with a spouse. When—as occurred periodically—Howie, their
middle child, had some problems, Susie had to turn to her own
father, the psychologist, for guidance. Her spellbound hubby was
in a dream chamber. It was not that Warren was uncaring about
the family. He was never mean—they knew he wouldn’t knowingly
hurt a ea. As Peter said, he had blinders on.
The entire family did a fair amount of rationalizing about those
blinders.23 They treated his work like some great, soulful endeavor
that no one could disturb. And in a sense, that was appropriate.
Something was happening in that dream chamber. And in the early
to middle seventies, it was happening as never before.
Bu ett would pick up the phone and return the most ordinary
“How are you?” with a riveting exclamation, as if he couldn’t
contain his pleasure. According to Cli ord Hayes, of Chiles Heider
& Co., one of the brokerages where Bu ett did business, Bu ett
would call “two, three, four, ve times a day.”
He just wanted the information; he didn’t want opinions. He’d ask about a company

he was interested in. I’d say, “What do you want, ve thousand shares? Ten thousand
shares?” He’d say, “Buy it!”

He would run his nger down the price-earnings column of the
stock table, and practically every P-E was in single digits. It was
one of those rare times on Wall Street: America was being given
away, and nobody wanted it. Bu ett’s reaction was instinctive: Be
greedy when others are fearful.
Now he had more ideas than cash—a complete reversal from the
sixties. In 1973, Bob Malott, who ran FMC Corp., asked Bu ett to
be a y on the wall while some candidates to manage FMC’s
pension fund made presentations. They were rather esoteric, and

Bu ett did not think much of them. “For two days,” Bu ett
recalled, “we sat there and listened to it. And at the end he asked
me what I thought and I told him it was all a waste of time.”24
Then Malott asked if Bu ett would take a crack at managing
some of FMC’s pension money himself. Bu ett said, “Okay, but
understand that FMC will get the dregs of my ideas. I’m going to
service Berkshire rst, Warren and Susie Bu ett second, and FMC
third.”25 The point was, he had enough ideas to go around.
For Malott, it was a coup. No one—not FMC’s pensioners, nor its
shareholders, nor the public—knew that Bu ett was running
money for him. It was as if Joe DiMaggio had ripped o his
Yankee suit and was playing American Legion ball incognito in his
spare time. (Over the ve years that he managed it, Bu ett’s FMC
portfolio rose 51 percent, compared with just under 3 percent for
the Dow.)26
Bu ett’s rst concern, as he said, was Berkshire. Early in. 1973,
he wanted to raise money for it, and hired Salomon Brothers to
raise $20 million in senior notes. Denis Bovin, an investment
banker fresh from Harvard, met Bu ett in Laguna Beach. They
mapped out the deal while sipping Pepsis, in view of the Paci c.
Bovin, who was unfamiliar with Bu ett’s Wall Street reputation,
next saw Bu ett at Salomon’s headquarters, in New York. As they
strolled through the great open trading room, Bu ett was spotted
and shouts erupted from traders—a foreshadowing of Bu ett’s later
dramatics at the rm. Robert Spiegel, the head stock trader, ran
over and blurted out, “Warren, I got a big block of—” and tried to
peddle a stock to him.
Bu ett’s decision to sell notes was based on a Bu ett rule of
thumb: get the money when it is cheap. (If you wait to borrow
until you need a loan, it is likely to be when others are also
borrowing, when—perforce—rates will be higher.)
Lenders were not exactly eager. Salomon had to persuade them
that the money was for Bu ett—not for textiles. The o ering
document reassuringly noted that Berkshire had reduced the capital
in textiles from $24 million to $11 million. Even so, lenders
insisted on a term enabling them to demand repayment if Bu ett

sold his stock. But he got the money at 8 percent. Some months
later, Salomon’s Donald Mutschler sent Bu ett a congratulatory
note:
Just as an aside, the money markets have certainly veri ed the famed Bu et [sic]
nancial acumen. I am not sure whether it would be possible at all to do your

nancing today and if it were … the rate would be north of 9%…. Your timing was

perfect.27

Mutschler did not know the half of it. Bu ett had started to
nibble on the Washington Post Co. In February, Berkshire bought
18,600 shares at 27.* In May, the stock fell to 23. Berkshire, armed
with the cheap money from Salomon, bought 40,000 shares more.
As the price fell further, Bu ett continued buying. In September, he
bought a huge block of 87,000 shares, at 20¾. By October 1973,
Berkshire, though unknown to the public, was the largest outside
investor in the Washington Post, the newspaper that Bu ett had
once delivered, and the dominant media property that he craved.
The Post, run by Katharine Graham, also owned four television
stations, Newsweek magazine, and newsprint mills. Such assets
often traded in private sales, and were not hard to value. Bu ett
gured that they were worth $400 million. But the stock market
was valuing the entire company at $100 million.
The people selling—professional fund managers—would not
have disputed those numbers. Why, then, were they selling? Quite
simply, they were afraid that the shares would drop further. They
were afraid that other people might sell.
As Bu ett analyzed the Post, sweetly and in his lonesome, he
saw it as that all too rare opportunity. Mr. Market had turned
gloomy—actually, seriously depressed. In such times, stock prices
bore no relation to underlying values. One simply couldn’t nd
such a bargain in the real world. Bu ett would explain:
It’s a lot di erent going out to Kalamazoo and telling whoever owns the television
station out there that because the Dow is down 20 points that day he ought to sell the

station to you a lot cheaper. You get into the real world when you deal with a

business. But in stocks everyone is thinking about relative price. When we bought 8
percent or 9 percent of the Washington Post in one month not one person who was

selling to us was thinking that he was selling us $400 million [worth] for $80 million.
They were selling to us because communication stocks were going down, or other
people were selling, or whatever reason. They had nonsensical reasons.28

We know their reasons. As Bu ett was investing in the Post, the
Wall Street Transcript assembled a group of Wall Street media
analysts to assess the industry. They agreed that, based on the
“fundamentals,” newspaper stocks were selling at point-blank
range. But to a man, they were fearful of pulling the trigger.
Kendrick Noble, of Auerbach, Pollak & Richardson, allowed that
“the Washington Post is certainly a dominant newspaper with good
potential growth.” But Noble had the fatal Wall Street habit of
looking over his shoulder:
I think the market is disregarding fundamentals. And with the horizons of our

economic scenario, we think this market coolness may continue.… It’s a tough time
for a fundamental analyst.29

It was, in fact, a marvelous time for a fundamental analyst.
Media stocks were dirt-cheap, a fact that could be demonstrated by
simple math. The media analysts did not have a complicated job.
They were on earth for one purpose—to evaluate shares of media
companies. The stocks being at their nadir, this was their moment.
And they let it pass.
In August, A liated Publications, owner of the Boston Globe,
went public. In the prevailing group-think, the fact that it owned
only that property made it risky. Never mind that the Globe had
two-thirds of its market. The fear was, if something happened—if
Bostonians no longer wanted to read about the Red Sox—you’d be
in trouble. You’d be second-guessed.
First Boston, the underwriter, had to price it on the cheap.
Knowing of Bu ett’s interest in newspapers, the investment bank
put out a feeler to Omaha. Bu ett was noncommittal.

Privately, he was doing cartwheels. Controlled by two old
Boston families, A liated had published the Globe since 1872. Its
circulation, revenue, and pro ts were rising, and these trends were
accelerating. As Bu ett knew, the rival Herald Traveler had folded
the previous year. Boston was becoming—Lord be praised!—a onepaper town, or, as Bu ett would have envisioned it, a monopoly
toll bridge spanning the Charles. To Bu ett, A liated’s simplicity
was not a weakness but a virtue, because its crown jewel was
undiluted.
When the o ering came to market, Berkshire was the biggest
buyer. Bu ett explained his rationale in a letter to William Taylor,
A liated’s president.
Harold Andersen [publisher of the Omaha World-Herald] is a good friend of mine, and
can tell you of my enthusiasm for excellent newspapers. I am equally enthusiastic

about bargain securities. A combination of the two in a single product is irresistible to

me. When the stock market values the Boston Globe at under $30 million, it strikes me
as ludicrous.30

The trick in such markets was to have the cash to exploit the
moment—as Bu ett put it, “to have your check clear.”31 Owing to
Bu ett’s timely sale of notes, Berkshire had the money. It was
buying stocks, especially media stocks, at every turn: Booth
Newspapers, Multimedia, Harte-Hanks Newspapers, and on it
went.
Around this time, Bu ett asked his Omaha buddy Dick Holland
an innocent-sounding question about the merits of owning an ad
agency. Suspecting nothing, Holland rattled on about how great it
was to be his own boss. He soon discovered Bu ett’s true interest:
Berkshire was buying major chunks of two big agencies,
Interpublic Group and Ogilvy & Mather International.†
Bu ett saw advertising as a free ticket on the media business.
Why free? Unlike, for instance, a certain mill in New Bedford, an
ad agency did not require capital—merely a desk and a couple of
pencils. To Bu ett, the lack of assets was a plus, because the
pro ts owed directly to the owners.

The Wall Street wisdom was directly opposite. Since an agency’s
“assets” went down the elevators at night, the agencies were seen
as evanescent. An agency was like Gertrude Stein’s Oakland—there
was no there there, just some English majors ddling with slogans.
Theoretically, anyone could do it. Bill Ruane, who was buying the
same ad stocks as Bu ett, got a bit hu y over this point with the
Wall Street Transcript:
Well that [advertising] is kind of wide open.
TRANSCRIPT

:

Anybody can become an ad agency.
Tomorrow.
We are not talking about a couple of longhaired artists in a loft in Greenwich Village.

RUANE

:

We are talking about a worldwide business
[Interpublic] with clients like Coca-Cola,
General Motors and Exxon, [with] gross
revenues of approximately $150 million.32

In fact, the big agencies had been quite stable. What’s more,
because Wall Street was so gloomy, Bu ett and Ruane were buying
them in the subbasement range of three to four times earnings.
By 1974, Berkshire owned 17 percent of Interpublic. Alarmed
that Bu ett might be thinking takeover, Carl Spielvogel, an
executive vice president, called to ask what his plans were.
Bu ett chuckled. “My plans?”
Now, Spielvogel was really worried. Bu ett invited him to stop
in Omaha the next time he ew to the West Coast. “By coincidence,
I’m going to California next week,” Spielvogel lied. In Omaha, he
remembered, “it must have been about minus ten degrees. I was
slipping and sliding. I wasn’t wearing galoshes because I was
supposedly on my way to California.”

Bu ett assured Spielvogel that he had bought Interpublic as an
investment. He spun out his philosophy: toll bridges, Ben
Graham … the entire catechism. To Spielvogel, it all sounded too
simple. Being wise to Madison Avenue, he was not prepared for a
prairie philosopher. He didn’t believe Bu ett.33
This was not surprising. Despite Bu ett’s activity in the market,
he was still rather invisible. His letters in Berkshire’s annual
reports were factual and terse, with none of the ourish of his
partnership letters. And Berkshire Hathaway was more invisible
still.
Its annual meetings were held in New Bedford, in Seabury
Stanton’s old ivory tower. After the formal business, Bu ett would
throw the meeting open to questions. It was a once-a-year shot to
ask Bu ett about investing. But hardly anyone showed up. Conrad
Ta , who had taken Graham’s class with Bu ett, and Ta ’s brother
Edwin, a security analyst, would attend, so Bu ett would spend
hours taking questions from the Ta s.34
There was so little interest in Berkshire that newspapers didn’t
quote its share price. Anyone in the public could have bought the
stock and gotten a free ride on Bu ett’s coattails (without paying
an override, as in the partnership). But interest in it was nil. After
hitting a high of 87 in mid-1973, Berkshire slumped with the
general market. In 1974, it retreated, sickeningly, to 40. According
to Edwin Ta :
There was a general disinterest, even among investment pros who knew Warren. One
guy said he’d rather buy it at 80. He wanted to see it move. Warren’s announcement
that he was retired threw people o .

Bu ett, though, seemed to have some future for Berkshire in
mind. He was steadily buying more of it. He even told his friends
in the securities business to lay o , so that when some of the thinly
traded stock became available he could get rst dibs.35 Charles
Heider, Bu ett’s broker in Omaha, said, “Warren didn’t like anyone
buying Berkshire.” Bu ett was so set on rming up his control that
he asked Verne McKenzie, the treasurer, not to invest in his own

company. (Bu ett nally told McKenzie he could go ahead in 1978
—twelve years after McKenzie had been hired.)
Meanwhile, the stocks Bu ett had bought for Berkshire were
sinking. By the end of 1973, the market value of Berkshire’s
portfolio, which had cost a total of $52 million, had sunk to only
$40 million. Bu ett wrote to the Rockford Bank’s Gene Abegg:
However poorly you may think the [bank] Plan did during 1973, be assured that my

record was even worse. It’s a good thing for my partners that I terminated the
Partnership when I did.36

His paper losses worsened signi cantly in 1974. And his net
worth, as measured by Berkshire’s price, fell by half. Yet it seemed
to dampen his spirits not at all. Stan Perlmeter, a money manager
who also worked in Kiewit Plaza, said, “You couldn’t tell from
talking to him that Warren was aware of it.”
Bu ett’s rare ability to separate his emotions from the Dow
Jones Industrial Average was a big part of his success. In the
sixties, when he had been making tons of money, he had been full
of fearful prophecies. But now, with his portfolio underwater, he
was salivating. Writing to Berkshire’s shareholders, his optimism
was evident:
We consider several of our major holdings to have great potential for signi cantly

increased values in future years, and therefore feel quite comfortable with our stock
portfolio.37

One such holding, A liated, reported a 40 percent earnings
increase for 1973. Nonetheless, the stock fell like a stone. Having
gone public at 10 a share, it sank within months to 9, 8, 7½—less
than ve times earnings. This was the acid test of an investor.
When a stock drops by 25 percent, it is only human to wonder if
one has made a mistake. Bu ett, though, truly believed that he
knew better than the crowd. On January 8, 1974, he bought more
A liated—and more still on January 11 and January 16. He was
back in the market on February 13, 14, 15, 19, 20, 21, and 22. He

went on all year, like a thirsty man holding a bucket out in the
rain. He bought A liated on 107 days, down to a low of 5½ a
share.
The market collapse of 1973–74 has been oddly ignored in the
annals of investing. Yet it was truly epochal, and on a par with the
1930s. Stocks fell from the sky and sat like overripe fruits. Fund
managers who had been eager to buy the nifty fty at eighty times
earnings were unwilling to buy A liated at ve times. What these
managers feared was the possibility not of being wrong, but of
being out of step. They were worried about being second-guessed—
not over the long term, but quarter by quarter. An interview with
Eric T. Miller, a manager at Oppenheimer, in the Wall Street
Transcript, stands as a sort of period piece. Miller lived in the
pristine suburb of Bronxville, New York. He enjoyed racquet
sports. He did not enjoy bear markets.
I wish we could say that we have strong preferences for areas that are unique right

now, but we don’t, partly because we don’t think it’s time to try to be a hero … to be

terribly venturesome, unless you could put me on [an] island and we were taking a
three-year view.38

It was, it needs repeating, the ideal time to be a hero. Yet where
managers had once been willing to gamble on the most dubious of
stocks, they now refused the soundest. Where optimism had been
second nature, it was now unknown. Fear was all they had left.
The headlines in 1974 described the ever-worsening funk.
Business Week: “Whistling Past the Graveyard”; Forbes: “Why Buy
Stocks?” Business Week: “The Sickening Slide”; Banon’s: “Running
Scared”; Forbes: “The Gloom Is Deepening”; Forbes: “Uncharted
Waters”; Fortune: “A Case for Gloom About Stocks”; Forbes: “Is the
Economic Situation out of Control?”
The economy was in a recession, and the usual solution of
priming the pump was unavailable. In ation in 1974 was 11
percent. This was a novel predicament, unknown even in the
thirties: in ation and recession. The cure for each seemed ruled out

by the presence of the other. Economists coined an ugly word:
“stag ation.” Interest rates soared to twentieth-century highs.
Government was at a loss—and increasingly distracted by the
question of what the President knew about Watergate and when he
had known it. Nixon ventured the opinion that he was not a crook.
Wall Street held its breath. In political circles, the talk was of
impeachment; in nancial circles, of depression.
Internationally, American capitalism was in retreat. The Third
World was organizing cartels, spurred by the success of OPEC.
Economists held that the millennium of growth was over; it only
remained to divide a xed pie into smaller shares. The evidence
was plain at the corner gas station.
Wall Street wore the country’s dismal mood for a mask. The nifty
fty stocks plunged by 80 percent. Peak to trough, Polaroid went
from 149 to 14⅛, Xerox from 171 to 49, Avon from 140 to 18⅝.
Morgan Guaranty, the largest pension-fund manager on the Street
and a rigid adherent of the nifty fty, lost an estimated two-thirds
of its clients’ money. Bankers Trust stopped buying equities for its
trust accounts altogether. Paradoxically, it was time to be buying
every stock in sight.
The Dow ended July at 757. By September, it had plunged to
607. As measured by the Dow, 40 percent of American industry
had evaporated into thin air. But the Dow did not begin to measure
the damage. Since 1968, the average stock had fallen an
astonishing 70 percent.39 On a single summer day, 447 stocks
touched new lows. The old-timers’ refrain that things had been
much worse in the Depression no longer played. The bear market
was in its sixth year—twice as long as the bear of 1929–32.
Bu ett was as fearful of in ation as anyone. His response was to
hunt for stocks, such as newspapers, that would be able to raise
rates in step. Similarly, he avoided companies with big capital
costs. (In an in ationary world, capital-intensive rms need more
dollars to replenish equipment and inventory.)
What Bu ett did not do was buy or sell stocks on the basis of
macroeconomic predictions. In an extreme case, Yarnall, Biddle &

Co. of Philadelphia urged clients to sell shares of Coca-Cola,
Pepsico, Dr Pepper, and Seven-Up because of the energy crisis:
Already supermarkets are noticing a trend for shoppers to make fewer trips while
buying more per trip. Shoppers may be increasingly unwilling to load up on the
relatively bulky soft drinks.…40

Invited to speak at the Harvard Business School—which had
stunned him with a rejection years earlier—Bu ett remarked that
investors were behaving in an irrational and “manic depressive”
fashion. Perhaps he had in mind Howard Stein, who had appeared
the previous week at the New York Society of Security Analysts.
Stein was the chairman of Dreyfus, an investment rm known for
a long-running television commercial in which a lion prowled the
byways of Wall Street. But now, the lion sounded more like
Chicken Little. Stein admitted that stocks were cheap, but he was
obsessed with “the enormity of the problems confronting us.” He
envisioned a fearful new world of scarcity, in which the standard
measures of value would no longer apply:
Price-earnings ratios, historic gains in earnings, projections of earnings per share and
the many other analytical devices that you and I work with seem to have little
relevance of late.… For so much that will a ect security prices, I feel, will be
in uences emanating from outside any particular industry—causing the better analyst

to lift his eyes and stretch his imagination beyond the immediate realm of his
specialty.41

In Stein’s apocalyptic vision of a world spinning o its axis,
earnings per share no longer mattered. Bu ett chose to ignore this
view and stay within “the realm of his specialty.” He could not size
up how the country’s problems would in uence the shares of the
Washington Post. His genius was in not trying. Civilization is too
variegated, its dynamics far too rich, for one to foresee its tides, let
alone the waves and wavelets that a ect securities prices. Wars
would be won and lost; prosperity would be hailed as everlasting
and bemoaned as ne’er recurring, as would politics, hemlines, and

the weather enjoy their seasons. Analyzing them was Wall Street’s
great game—and its great distraction. In its oating salon,
everything was interesting and nothing was certain—the
President, the economy, the e ect of OPEC on sales of Pepsi-Cola.
None of these would substitute for critically evaluating an
individual stock. When you purchased a share of Washington Post
stock, ultimately you would not be rewarded on the basis of
whether war broke out in the Middle East. You were buying
nothing more, nothing less, than a share of the business—a claim
on the future pro ts of its publishing and television assets. Yet if
you knew what the Post, or any one business, was worth, it rang
with the clarity of a single note. That was the sound Bu ett
strained for. Nothing else mattered, least of all the thousand
cacophonous voices debating the future. Stein was searching for a
glimpse of “more stable and anticipatable times,” but Bu ett was
unwilling to wait. As he had once told his partners, the future was
never clear. What was very clear to him was that certain securities
were available for less—far less—than the value of their assets.
Everything else—his son’s strained back, the cries of Chicken Little
—he cleared away.
There remained Stein’s labored question as to whether the old
standards of value had been outlived. One recalls Graham’s
response to Senator Fulbright, who had asked him two decades
back: Why would stock prices, even if cheap, necessarily go up?
That is one of the mysteries of our business.
In September, Graham emerged from retirement to speak to
security analysts, urging them to awaken to what he termed a
“renaissance of value.” Investing, he reminded them, did not
require a genius.
What it needs is,

rst, reasonably good intelligence; second, sound principles of

operation; third, and most important, rmness of character.42

There were others, such as Bill Ruane and John Ne , who said
publicly that it was time to take the plunge. But in the main, the
Street indulged in a Hamlet-like exercise in navel-gazing. “To Be or

Not to Be—in Stocks,” wondered the Wall Street brokerage Hayden
Stone. The facts were clear; P-Es were at postwar lows, stocks were
cheap. Yet Hayden Stone agonized:
So many problems remain that this time things may not work out.… our whole social
structure is so di erent.… no one can predict.… can we comprehend and cope?43

It made one’s head hurt. Hayden Stone advised postponing major
stock purchases “until there is more certainty.” Would someone
kindly ring a bell, advising Hayden Stone in advance of the
market’s turn? What was missing was not intelligence but, as
Graham suggested, moral ber: the “ rmness of character” to act
on one’s beliefs. At that point—early in October 1974—Bu ett, for
the rst time in his life, made a public prediction about the stock
market. The occasion was an interview with Forbes. The Dow Jones
Industrial Average was at 580.
“How do you feel?” Forbes asked.
“Like an oversexed guy in a whorehouse. This is the time to start
investing,” Bu ett said.
His doubts about the future had vanished. His stock was at a low,
but his sap had never been higher. Berkshire was stu ed with
securities, and Bu ett was buying them day by day.
I call investing the greatest business in the world because you never have to swing.
You stand at the plate, the pitcher throws you General Motors at 47! U.S. Steel at 39!
and nobody calls a strike on you. There’s no penalty except opportunity lost. All day

you wait for the pitch you like; then when the elders are asleep, you step up and hit
it.44

He had quit in 1969, but now, with the market at a low, his spikes
were laced and his bat was cocked. There was no “To Be or Not to
Be,” no equivocation. As he said to Forbes, “Now is the time to
invest and get rich.” Bu ett was back.
* For comparison with current prices, by 1995 Post shares had split four-for-one.

† Bu ett was still as secretive as possible. However, all investors are required to disclose 5
percent holdings.

Chapter 9

ALTER EGO

Howard Bu ett, Warren’s older son, thought his father was the
second-most-intelligent man he knew. The smartest, in his
estimation, was his father’s West Coast philosopher friend Charlie
Munger. To the writer Morey Bernstein, Munger was “the real
mystery man,” the quirky thinker who stood a heartbeat away.
Munger was Bu ett’s sounding board; Munger—and only Munger
—he let into the tent. The two of them had a peculiar symbiosis
and, as in a good marriage, an aura of inevitability. Dr. Edwin
Davis, who had helped to arrange their meeting, had been
impressed by their similar mannerisms and wit. Bu ett’s daughter
thought them “clones,” walking with the same foot forward and
even bearing a slight resemblance.
Yet where Bu ett was cheerful, his Los Angeleno compadre was
dour. He lacked Bu ett’s easy grace and su ered fools not at all.
Frequently, he did not bother to say goodbye, preferring to bolt
from his chair at the conclusion of his business.
Munger was so deeply skeptical of his fellow man that Bu ett
dubbed him “the abominable no-man.” This, in fact, provided a
clue to Munger’s unique talent as Bu ett’s consigliere. His
approach to life—of particular use to an investor—was to ask what

could go wrong. He liked to quote the algebraist Carl Jacobi:
“Invert, always invert.” Thus, at a high school commencement,
Munger gave a sermon not on the qualities that would lead to
happiness, but on those that would guarantee a miserable life.
Always invert.
Bu ett had used Munger as his lawyer in a couple of
acquisitions, and Munger owned a tiny slice of Diversi ed
Retailing, which Bu ett controlled. Otherwise, their careers were
separate. Since the sixties, Munger had been managing Wheeler,
Munger & Co., an investment partnership, located in a convenient
but decrepit pipe-strewn o ce on the mezzanine deck of the
Paci c Stock Exchange. This setup suited Munger, as it showcased
his contempt for pretentious corporate suites. Just to grace the
point, Munger put his secretary in the private room in back; he
and his partner worked in the open anteroom.
Scarcely an hour would pass but that Munger would roar at the
secretary, “Get me Warren!” Ira Marshall, Munger’s partner, had
the sense that Munger was cultivating Bu ett, and that he wanted
to become his partner. Yet, oddly, their professional linkage was
accidental. Each, independently, had been buying stock in a Los
Angeles company known as Blue Chip Stamps.1 Bu ett bought it
for himself, personally, and also for Berkshire Hathaway. By the
early seventies, Bu ett was the biggest owner of Blue Chip, and
Munger was the second-biggest.
Blue Chip belonged to a fading slice of Americana. It collected a
fee from supermarkets that distributed its trading stamps and
redeemed these stamps for “free” toasters, lawn chairs, and the
like. Bu ett, of course, had no interest in toasters. He was
interested in the money.
The secret of its appeal was that Blue Chip gathered in cash upfront, but disgorged its funds only over time, as shoppers brought
in stamp books. Often the stamps were stu ed into drawers and
forgotten. In the interim, Blue Chip had free use of the oat. To
Bu ett, Blue Chip was simply an insurance company that wasn’t
regulated.

Its “premiums”—that is, the stamps sold to retailers—amounted
to $120 million a year. This gave Bu ett a hefty bankroll, in
addition to the one he had at Berkshire. He and Munger went on
Blue Chip’s board, took over the investment committee, and began
to put the oat to work.
For Bu ett, this was a dangerous game. An investor operating
two pools of capital is working for competing, and potentially
con icting, masters. Oddly, given Bu ett’s concern for his
reputation, this did not occur to him. He and his friend were
having too good a time buying cheap stocks together. When Bu ett
was in California, which was not infrequently, they would laugh
about the pickings, making it sound so easy.2
One example was Source Capital, a closed-end mutual fund, also
in Los Angeles. Source had been started by Fred Carr, the Go-Go
manager, in 1968. In the early seventies, after Carr quit, its stock
crashed. Indeed, it fell, as many stocks did, by too much. Though
Source had $18 a share in asset value, the price slumped to 9. Blue
Chip scooped up 20 percent of the fund. Thus, Bu ett and Munger
nally came around to Go-Go, but only when everyone else had
left the party.
Munger, representing Blue Chip, went on Source’s board and
took a sledgehammer to anything he didn’t like. One time, looking
over the bond portfolio, he noticed that Source owned some lessthan-safe names. He bluntly told the portfolio manager, “This is a
perfectly respectable Baa list. For Source Capital I don’t want
anything but A1.”3 Bu ett could not have asked for a better proxy
—especially since he was ill suited to playing the tough cop and
tried to avoid unpleasantness.
In 1971, Bu ett and Munger got what was potentially the
opportunity of a lifetime—a “good business” of the sort that
Munger preferred, as distinct from the cheap Ben Graham type.
Robert Flaherty, an investment adviser to Blue Chip, learned that
See’s Candy Shops, a premier chocolate chain in California, was
for sale. William Ramsey, a Blue Chip executive, was hot to buy it.
He went over to Flaherty’s o ce, and they put in a call to Bu ett,
who was at his home in Omaha.

“Gee, Bob,” Bu ett said. “The candy business. I don’t think we
want to be in the candy business.” Then the phone went dead.
Ramsey, who had heard this on the speaker phone, began to
pace the oor frantically while they tried to get Bu ett back. It
seemed like an eternity. The secretary mistakenly dialed Bu ett’s
o ce, where no one answered.
After three or four minutes, they got hold of him. Before they
could say a word, Bu ett said, “I was taking a look at the numbers.
Yeah, I’d be willing to buy See’s at a price.”
What the “numbers” told Bu ett was that California chocoholics
were willing to pay a premium price for the See’s well-regarded
brand. But the price for the company was $30 million. Bu ett and
Munger were dissuaded by the paltry level of the See’s book value,
and would go no higher than $25 million.4 There the talks ended.
In this case, Bu ett had made a common mistake.
Investors often assume that book value approximates, or at least
is suggestive of, what a company is “worth.” In fact, the two
express quite di erent concepts. Book value is equal to the capital
that has gone into a business, plus whatever pro ts have been
retained. An investor is concerned with how much can be taken out
in the future; that is what determines a company’s “worth” (or its
“intrinsic value,” as Bu ett would say).
Suppose, for a moment, that a new company invested in candymaking equipment, stores, and inventory identical to those of
See’s. Its book value would be the same, but the name on its candy
box would be unknown. And this upstart, having far less earning
power, would be worth far less. Since book value is blind to
intangibles such as brand name, for a company such as See’s it is
meaningless as an indicator of value.
But Bu ett and Munger got lucky. See’s rang back and took the
$25 million—Bu ett’s biggest investment by far. With seeming
suddenness, his empire now included candy, textiles, retail,
insurance, banking, publishing, and trading stamps.
Bu ett’s trick was to compartmentalize these holdings as though
each were an only child. Wearing his See’s hat, he did a cram

course on sugar futures. His letter to Chuck Huggins, president of
See’s, shows Bu ett delving into surprising detail.
My reluctant inclination … is to take prices up on Sunday, December 29. My present
thinking is 20¢ to 30¢ per pound.… If sugar futures keep falling as they have the last
few days, I would be inclined to hold o
the market for re ned sugar.5

on purchases until we get some reaction in

Bu ett also pestered Huggins about enhancing the See’s brand
name. Ironically, Bu ett’s inadequacy as an epicure enlightened
him as to what the company was really “selling.”
Maybe grapes from a little eight-acre vineyard in France are really the best in the

whole world, but I have always had a suspicion that about 99% of it is in the telling
and about 1% is in the drinking.6

Then Bu ett would tunnel his attention onto trading stamps.
Discount supermarkets had been taking business from stampdispensing stores, which were increasingly seen as a bad deal for
shoppers. Bu ett bombarded Blue Chip with ideas on how to
counter this perception, but he conceded, in a revealing bit of selfanalysis, that marketing was out of his range:
The problem I have is that I think like an accountant or an actuary. My reaction is to
explain all the facts and do all the mathematics for the consumer, to show her just
how much better o she is by getting our stamps. I think I could convince a group of

mathematicians, actuaries, security analysts or accountants … but [not] the
housewife.7

Bu ett also put $45 million of the “ oat” from Blue Chip into bank
stocks, mimicking his capital reallocation at Berkshire.8
But now his dangerous game was well along. He was investing
on behalf of three companies, Berkshire, Blue Chip, and
Diversi ed, that had separate groups of shareholders, and he was
obliged to each to get the best deals. Into which pocket would he
put the Washington Post and which the See’s Candy? Understand
that Bu ett was scrupulously fair about it. Even so, the con ict of

interest was inherent and inescapable. The arrangement was
complex beyond call, and for Bu ett quite out of character. And
where matters are complex, the securities cops rightfully pay
attention.
In the midst of this merry game, a broker o ered Bu ett a block
of Wesco Financial, a Pasadena, California, company that owned a
savings and loan. Bu ett knew Wesco in his sleep. He had read its
annual report—as he did those of hundreds of savings and loans—
every year since the mid-sixties.9 Wesco was trading in the low
teens, less than half its book value.* Bu ett checked with Munger,
who agreed that it was cheap, and Blue Chip snapped up 8 percent
of the shares.10 At the time—the summer of 1972—Wesco was a
minor, $2 million investment. But in January 1973, Wesco
announced a plan to merge with another California savings and
loan, Financial Corp. of Santa Barbara.
Bu ett and Munger instantly reached the same conclusion:
Wesco was giving away the store. Under the merger terms, holders
of Wesco would exchange their undervalued stock for shares in
Santa Barbara—which seemed highly overvalued. Quoting Bu ett:
I read these terms, and I didn’t believe them. And I told [Munger] the terms as

announced and he couldn’t believe it as I couldn’t believe it. But it was there in black
and white on the Dow Jones tape.11

Munger wanted to buy more stock in Wesco, in the hope of
defeating the merger, which would be subject to a vote of
shareholders. Bu ett, who was stoic about taking an occasional
loss, did not. He said, “To hell with it; we made a mistake.”12 But
Munger persevered. For the next six weeks, Blue Chip bought every
Wesco share in sight, accumulating 20 percent of the stock.
However, they still could not stop the merger. And now Blue
Chip was in deep. As Munger said, they were like the rat in the
trap who decides it no longer wants the cheese.
In February, Munger paid a call on Louis R. Vincenti, Wesco’s
president. Using an odd choice of words, Munger said that Blue
Chip had been buying stock “in the hope of creating a climate” in

which Vincenti and the other Wesco directors would not feel any
“moral obligation” to carry out the merger.
Vincenti stuck to the script. He observed that Blue Chip was free
to vote no, and to solicit other shareholders to do the same. To
Munger, such a populist course reeked of vulgarity. He had come
as a man of honor, con dent that between two such men no
problem was irresolvable. He declared that he liked Wesco’s
management, and that Vincenti, in particular, was Bu ett’s and
Munger’s sort of fellow. In fact, Munger declared several times that
if Vincenti personally asked him, man to man, so to speak, Blue
Chip would stop buying shares.13
Vincenti thought it most odd. He did not understand Munger’s
appeal to morality in the midst of a routine business transaction.
Yet it went to the core of what distinguished Munger, which was
an adherence to old-school ethics. He never tired of quoting
Benjamin Franklin, whose aphorisms he judged more useful than
most of what was taught in business school.
In and out of business, Munger subscribed to the gentleman’s
code. He was headstrong about getting his way, but indi erent to
assessing blame or credit for the results. When a doctor botched a
cataract operation, ruining his eyesight, he uncomplainingly
observed that it happened in a tiny percentage of such cases and
took to studying ophthalmology.14
In private life, Munger was enormously active. Following the
Belous abortion case, he was a driving force for instituting abortion
clinics in Los Angeles.15 As a volunteer chairman of Good
Samaritan Hospital, he totally revamped the hospital’s mission and
menu of specialties. Yet he bullied the doctors, as he did his fellow
trustees at the local Planned Parenthood. Where Bu ett had a
common touch, the Republican Munger reeked of noblesse oblige.
He would lope into a boardroom, thinking out loud and telling
stories that he found uproarious, a half-blind philosopher-king with
a hugely magnifying and terrifying lens.16
“Charlie is very funny, and also very pompous,” said a member
of Bu ett’s circle. “He believes in the aristocratic point of view,

that there is a select group of accomplished, talented people in the
world, and that he is one of them.”
Munger was wont to joke about establishing a Munger
“dynasty.” When he divorced his wife, “the rst duchess,” he read
obituaries in the hope of nding a widow with the desired
attributes for his intended o spring. He and the “second duchess”
raised eight little Munger lords and ladies.
Unlike his Omaha partner, he led a big life, shing in the rivers
and wilds of various continents for trout, bone sh, and Atlantic
salmon, holding court at the California Club, and dominating a
party, especially after a glass of wine. Ira Marshall recalled a
soirée in Bel-Air: Munger was talking his way through a rambling,
sonorous monologue—something about a thousand-year orgasm—
which Munger found quite funny, when the host asked Marshall,
“Can you get Charlie to shut up? No one can say a word.”
Otis Booth, a close friend, would awake in the middle of the
night on a shing trip and Munger would be sitting up poring over
a book, likely quite arcane. On an expedition with Booth and
Marshall to the Australian rain forest, all the while as their jeep
went bounding through the jungle Munger was reading an obscure
work of paleontology. Then, at night, Munger lectured the group
from his reading, “telling us out of the clear blue sky how the
dinosaurs evolved into birds,” Marshall recalled.
People, including many of Bu ett’s friends, were intimidated by
Munger’s weighty discourses on black holes and Einstein, not to
mention his contemptuous manner. Bu ett’s friend Roxanne
Brandt once remarked that the only hospital she knew of in Los
Angeles was Cedar Sinai Medical Center. Munger shot back,
“That’s because you’re Jewish.”
Yet Munger was a formidable armchair psychologist and, in
particular, a student of behavior. He saw the devil in such
phenomena as the inability of people to change their minds, or
what he termed “ rst-conclusion bias”:
“This is why organizations solicit public pledges. Hell, it’s the
reason for the marriage ceremony.”17

Bu ett was deeply in uenced by such precepts of Munger’s. Yet
it was Bu ett, not Munger, who had the more natural touch when
it came to applying them. Indeed, Bu ett was a master at
overcoming a person’s “ rst-conclusion bias.”
In the Wesco matter, after Munger had failed with Vincenti,
Bu ett began to court the one director with the power to abort the
merger. Elizabeth Peters, a San Francisco heiress, was Wesco’s
largest shareholder.18 Peters’s parents had founded the savings and
loan and taken it public in the late 1950s. Her brothers being
unsuited to the task, it had been left to Peters, an English major, to
learn the business and protect the family interest. She found, rst,
that she was good at it, and second, that Wesco provided an
agreeable contrast to her other pursuits, which included tending to
a Napa Valley vineyard that produced a ne cabernet and reading
Chaucer.
By the early seventies, Wesco had gone a bit at. Peters was
anxious to give it a kick, but the other directors had little interest,
nancial or otherwise. When Santa Barbara made its o er, Peters
knew that the terms were sorry, but she reckoned that a merger
might stir the pot.
Bu ett sent Donald Koeppel, Blue Chip’s president, to talk to
Peters, but she remained adamantly in support of the merger. A
short time after Koeppel left, Bu ett called. He pleasantly
introduced himself, and suggested a tête-à-tête.
A couple of days later, Bu ett and Peters sat down in a lounge at
the San Francisco airport. Bu ett told her that in his opinion,
Wesco stock would in time be worth far more than what Santa
Barbara was o ering. This was the refrain that Peters had heard
from Koeppel, but from Bu ett it sounded more persuasive. For
one thing, Bu ett spoke to her as a fellow owner. His capital was
on the line with hers.
When Peters insisted that something had to be done to
reinvigorate Wesco, Bu ett said he’d like to try it himself. He
talked some about his relationship with other companies, which he
described as being one of partnership. He talked some about
himself. He was calmly reassuring, pushing the right buttons.

Peters felt that she wouldn’t mind being this guy’s partner,
either. She liked Bu ett—liked him a lot.19 And he was a ray of
hope.
Peters had just one question. “Mr. Bu ett, if I buy you, what
happens if you get hit by a truck at the intersection?” Who would
save Wesco then?
Bu ett replied that he had a partner whose ability he considered
equal to his own. He had arranged for this fellow to be in charge of
Berkshire, and of Bu ett’s family interests, in the event of a
“truck,” and he felt that either of them could be trusted with
Wesco.20
When Bu ett nished, Peters had made up her mind. The merger
was dead.
Bu ett and Munger now felt an obligation to her, and decided to
raise their stake in Wesco. They could have bought stock on the
cheap, as, ordinarily, when a merger blows apart the stock will
tank. But to chisel investors who were bailing out because of the
deal’s failure—a failure for which Bu ett and Munger were directly
responsible—would seem less than classy. Therefore, they told
their brokers to be liberal about the price.
Blue Chip bid for Wesco at 17—the price that had prevailed
before the deal had fallen through. Though this was highly unusual,
according to Munger, “We decided in some quixotic moment that it
was the right way to behave.”
Blue Chip raised its stake to 24.9 percent. Subsequently, Wesco’s
shares fell, along with the general market, and Blue Chip made
several tender o ers. By the middle of 1974, Blue Chip owned a
majority of the stock (Peters continued as a big minority holder).
There matters seemed to rest. But unbeknownst to Bu ett and
Munger, their trail had been picked up by the Securities and
Exchange Commission.
The rst hint of trouble came in the fall of 1974. It arose, in
part, from Bu ett and Munger’s intricate, but still informal,
partnership. Bu ett and Munger, separately, owned stock in both
Blue Chip and Diversi ed Retailing. However, Munger was not
involved in Berkshire. Thus, when Bu ett spent money from his

Blue Chip pocket, it was collaborative; when he reached into
Berkshire—his front pocket—he was on his own. The interlocking
ownership made for a confusing, con icted mess.21

As a rst step toward untangling these spaghetti strands, Bu ett
and Munger announced a plan to merge Diversi ed into Berkshire.
But the SEC had questions. Lots of questions.
Munger, at rst, presumed that the SEC was delaying them
because Bu ett and he were such “interesting” characters. He had a
quaint image of a regulator scrutinizing Blue Chip as though it
were an unusual bug that had crawled across its microscope. But as
the months dragged on, Munger got testy. Writing to Charles
Rickershauser, his and Bu ett’s lawyer at Munger’s law rm,

Munger had an aggrieved air, as though dealing with a plodding
functionary at the bureau of motor vehicles:
I hope the foregoing will satisfy everyone at the SEC and that, if not, you can arrange
that I receive the promptest possible response, preferably by direct telephone calls to
me, so that we can clear up any problems and get our merger consummated.22

Alas, Munger had not read Kafka. Rickershauser sent a toneddown version of his letter to the SEC. In December, Munger got his
prompt response—though not the one he expected. The SEC
opened a formal investigation of the Prince of Omaha: In the
Matter of Blue Chip Stamps, Berkshire Hathaway Inc., Warren Bu et
[sic], HO-784. Bu ett was now the target of a full-scale probe.
Blue Chip, Berkshire, Bu et [sic], singly or in concert with others … may have
engaged in acts which may have, directly or indirectly operated as a device, scheme,
or arti ce to defraud; or included an untrue statement of a material fact or omitted …
23

The inquiry focused on whether Blue Chip had “manipulated” the
price of Wesco’s stock, a vague charge that can be di cult to
resolve either way. Within the SEC’s enforcement division, it was
considered a big case, and it quickly broadened into a general
investigation of everything Bu ett had touched.
Under subpoena, Bu ett shipped three cartons of les to
Washington. His stock-transfer records, his letters to Blue Chip, his
every memo to the textile mill and See’s Candy and to Bu ett’s
bankers—all of it was sucked into the SEC vacuum. In the opinion
of Verne McKenzie, Berkshire’s treasurer, “They had discovered a
rich guy and decided he had to be a crook.”
Bu ett was concerned, but calm. He had the same un appable
patience that he brought to investing, even when his reputation
was on the line. Munger, in contrast, was nearly apoplectic.
Roderick Hills, Munger’s former law partner, was then serving
as White House counsel. As the investigation gathered steam, word
leaked out that Hills had been o ered the job of SEC chairman.
Rickershauser, Bu ett’s and Munger’s lawyer, called Hills and

pleaded with him to turn it down, arguing that if he took the job
the SEC might feel compelled to bend over backward and judge
them more harshly. “Is there anything there?” Hills asked, alluding
to the investigation. Rickershauser said, “No, it’s crap.” Hills
shrugged it o . Then Munger called a couple of times, berating
Hills for supposedly abandoning Bu ett in his hour of need. But
Hills took the job.
Munger appeared at the SEC in March 1975, for two days of
testimony. He grandly assured his interrogators, “If anything is
wrong, Warren and I take full responsibility,” as though that
would put an end to it. He treated it as a test of character,
frequently referring to the honor of various parties.
The young SEC lawyers, ignoring his tone, bored in on him. They
intimated that Munger perhaps had conspired to sell short the
stock of Wesco’s suitor as a means of torpedoing the merger.
Munger protested, “That is not our style of operation.” He sounded
shocked, like a confessor who has stumbled upon a policeman
instead of a priest.
The SEC, in fact, suspected a plot. Speci cally, had Blue Chip
blown up the merger in order to take over Wesco for itself?
For how long before February 26 had this approach
Q

:

[seeking control of Wesco] been under consideration by
you and Mr. Bu ett?
As I stated earlier, 98 percent of our attention was
devoted to the task at hand. We are believers in

MUNGER

:

Carlyle’s Prescription, that the job a man is to do is the
job at hand and not see what lies dimly in the
distance.24

Undeterred by Carlyle, the SEC lawyers went to the heart. Why,
that is, had Blue Chip paid more than necessary for Wesco?

Q

MUNGER

Q

Why would you intentionally pay a higher price for

:

something that you could get for less?
:

We wanted to look very fair and equitable to Lou
Vincenti and Betty Peters.
What about your shareholders? Didn’t you want to be

:

fair to them?
Well, we didn’t feel our obligation to shareholders
required us to do anything which isn’t consistent with

MUNGER

:

leaning over backwards to be fair. We have that Ben
Franklin idea that—if you will—the honest policy is the
best policy.… You look puzzled.
I am. It was my impression that businessmen always try

Q

:

to maximize pro ts for the corporation and
shareholders that they serve.
Well, maybe we’re trying to maximize pro ts over the
long pull If we hope to have a long and congenial

MUNGER

:

working relationship with Louis Vincenti maybe it’s just,
in light of self-interest, to lean over backwards on deals
where you might think he cared.25

This was similar to the theme that Bu ett had struck with Betty
Peters in San Francisco. A long-term investment was more than
merely a bet on a stock; it was a form of partnership. A big
shareholder—a partner—gave as well as got. To Bu ett, the very
word “partner” had a powerful implication, suggesting a raft of

unspoken responsibilities and loyalties, such as he had felt toward
the investors in Bu ett Partnership.
The modern portfolio manager saw stocks in two dimensions;
they ickered across the screen, and at the push of a button they
disappeared. Bu ett and Munger wanted a larger role. They often
talked about how managing money was not enough. As Munger
recalled, “I said to Warren, ‘We don’t want to be like Russell Sage,
a shrewd, miserable accumulator.’ We didn’t want to be
remembered by friends and family for nothing but pieces of
paper.”†
The SEC lawyers were incredulous. It looked to them as if Blue
Chip had been propping up Wesco’s stock—i.e., “manipulating” it
—presumably to sell at a higher price. But as Blue Chip hadn’t
sold, the lawyers were mysti ed. Now, they tried with Bu ett.
From a business point of view, wouldn’t it have been
Q

:

better to let the price go down and buy it at the cheaper
price?
On that single transaction it might, but I think if you
look at the overall Blue Chip picture, having the people

BUFFETT

:

at Wesco feeling that shareholders had been fairly
treated … I think the general business reputation of
Blue Chip would not have been as good.

Q

BUFFETT

Q

How about your responsibility to the shareholders of

:

:

Blue Chip?
:

I own a fair amount of stock. It has an impact on us.
We’re not spending other people’s money entirely.
You think it might have looked bad if right after the
merger blew up, you went into the market and the price

went down?
BUFFETT

:

I think someone might have been sore about it.
I’m extremely puzzled by this rationale that somehow
you thought the management of Wesco would be upset

Q

:

or sore at you.… I’m saying why should you care, why
should Blue Chip care, why should the management of
Wesco care?
It’s important how the Wesco management feels about
us. You can say, well, we own the controlling interest so
it doesn’t make any di erence. But it does make a

BUFFETT

:

di erence. Lou Vincenti doesn’t really need to work for
us. He likes working with us. And I enjoy working with
him, and it’s a good relationship. If he felt that we
were, you know, slobs or something, it just wouldn’t
work. It isn’t based solely on the salary he’s getting.26

It is implausible that a government agency would have
badgered, say, J. P. Morgan, Sr., for paying too much attention to
his reputation. “Why should you care?” To Morgan’s
contemporaries, the question would have been unthinkable. But so
much of that era had been lost. Indeed, Bu ett’s dialogue with the
SEC was suggestive of a colloquy across di erent centuries. The
agency, and the buttoned-down lawyers whom it was accustomed
to dealing with, de ned corporate a airs as a series of
transactions. Each action was discrete: today’s partner could be
tomorrow’s adversary. Bu ett preferred to think in terms of
relationships, some of them lasting. He stubbornly stuck to his
antique code like a rolltop desk for which he had a quaint
fondness. Perversely, it was seen as grounds for suspicion.

The fact that Bu ett had a doppelgänger merely heightened the
SEC’s suspicions. They had found the co-conspirator; now they
merely needed the crime. Naturally, they looked for it in the
mysterious-seeming alliance of Bu ett and Munger.
Q

:

Who at Blue Chip makes the investment decisions?
It would usually be Mr. Bu ett. He would ordinarily

MUNGER

:

consult with me and get my approval before he went
ahead.
Now, after Mr. Bu ett placed the order for the rst

Q

:

purchase, did he tell you that he was going to keep
purchasing the stock of Wesco Financial?
That type of thing is so natural to us that frequently we

MUNGER

:

don’t have to talk to one another or discuss what our
future intentions are.

Q

:

Did you ask him?

MUNGER

Q

:

I don’t have to. I understand how his mind works.
Would you consider yourself Mr. Bu ett’s—like—alter

:

ego?27

The casual phrasing was disingenuous. The SEC had heard the term
from Betty Peters. They tried it on Bu ett, too.
Q

Did you consider him sort of like an alter ego to

:

BUFFETT

yourself?
:

Well, it depends on what area you’re talking about. We
di er on some investments, you know. On most

investment decisions, we tend to agree.
From the time you became sort of investing philosophers
Q

:

in the same manner would you say you consulted with
him on most of your investments?

BUFFETT

Q

:

No, I wouldn’t.… I would say there was a trend in that
direction.
Okay. So that you both discuss many investments,

:

philosophies, what you’re investing in.

BUFFETT

:

Sure.
So you know basically what he is buying and selling

Q

:

most of the time [and] he knows what you are buying
and selling?
He knows what I got an interest in buying or selling. I

BUFFETT

:

know some of the things he has an interest in. In terms
of keeping track of what he is actually doing at a given
time, I have no idea.28

Bu ett’s tenor was unhurried. He returned to the SEC, informally
and on several occasions, and seemed to go out of his way to help
his interrogators. He patiently explained the Blue Chip jigsaw
puzzle to Lawrence Seidman, an SEC attorney. When they took a
break for lunch, Bu ett told Seidman about his youth in
Washington. Here and there, he sprinkled in a dose of the Bu ett
philosophy. Soon Seidman was caught in Bu ett’s gossamer web,
just as Betty Peters had been. Seidman recalled:
I sat around a table with him a number of times, charting it out. He’d say, “You’re
wrong here, this company doesn’t own this,” or, “That belongs over here.” I spent a lot

of time with him. I didn’t view it as adversarial. He was a superb person to deal with
—even though we were on the other side.

For the modern chief executive, the idea of wandering into the
SEC unaccompanied by a lawyer and taking up one’s case with a
junior investigator—and, indeed, supplying him with information
—would be so out of the question as to be ludicrous. Even if he had
a mind to do so, the executive’s lawyers would protest and
doubtless restrain him. The modern spirit is a hesitant one.
Spontaneity has given way to cautious legalisms, and the age of
heroes has been superseded by a cult of specialization. We have no
more giants; only obedient ants.
Bu ett was at least a bit larger. He was a throwback to the age
—long, long past—when people had been willing to act without
their lawyers. He sensed that these modern auxiliaries—not only
the lawyers, but also the government-relations people, consultants,
and myriad other advisers—did not merely help, they also
controlled. And that was anathema to him. Succeed or fail, Bu ett
would permit no one else to set the agenda for him.
The beauty of his sweet solo act was that it worked. People
responded to his openness, in addition to his considerable personal
charm, and they were disarmed by his lack of contentiousness.
Bu ett did not confront Seidman; he turned him into mush.
“Larry,” Bu ett said nally, “if you look at it your way, you’re
right, there is a technical violation. If you look at it our way, there
isn’t. But we weren’t out to do anything wrong. Now how do we
solve it?”
The case dragged on through 1975. The SEC went shing in a
new area: Source Capital—yet another Bu ett-and-Mungercontrolled pool of funds. By now, Bu ett was “sick to death” over
his sundry complications.29 If the nightmare of being under the
lamp ever ended, he told the SEC, he yearned to simplify his
a airs:
So hopefully we would have the same businesses we have now, but less

complications. I really don’t like these complications. It seemed fairly simple while we

were doing it, but not simple now.30

In December, Rickershauser, Bu ett’s lawyer, pleaded for an
end, arguing that Bu ett had done nothing to deserve such
scrutiny. He trumpeted Bu ett’s unblemished record of preparing
his own tax returns over three decades as a sort of contemporary
object lesson on a par with Lincoln’s log cabin.
He has paid federal income taxes continuously since his paper-route earnings required
them at age 14, aggregating several millions of dollars over that 30-year period, and his
total de ciency assessments have been less than $200.31

In 1976—two years after the inquiry had begun—the SEC
settled. The terms amounted to a slap on the wrist. The SEC
formally charged that Blue Chip had purchased Wesco not merely
as an investment, as it had disclosed, but also for the purpose of
defeating the merger (which was true). It also alleged that Blue
Chip had arti cially propped up Wesco’s market price over a threeweek period. Blue Chip agreed not to do it again, without
admitting or denying guilt, a common clause in such settlements. It
also forked over $115,000 to certain Wesco shareholders that the
SEC construed had been hurt by Blue Chip’s trades.
The SEC did not take action against Bu ett. But a few weeks
later, it named him to a blue-ribbon panel to study corporate
disclosure practices. Possibly the agency was o ering absolution.
To say the least, it was unusual treatment for a guy it had spent
the previous two years investigating.
Bu ett got rid of, or simpli ed, his “complications” with the zeal
of a reformed sinner. He sold Blue Chip’s interest in Source Capital
(which had doubled). He quit his sideline as a money manager for
FMC. He consolidated Wesco within Blue Chip (he would have
bought all of Wesco, but stopped at 80 percent at the request of
Betty Peters). And, after a further two-year hiatus, he went ahead
and merged Diversi ed into Berkshire.
Happily for Bu ett, the merger formalized his union with
Munger. In exchange for his Diversi ed stock, Munger got 2

percent of the stock in Berkshire. Also, Bu ett named his pal vice
chairman. Munger remained in Los Angeles, pursuing largely
separate interests, and he was modest about his role in Berkshire.
“By a signi cant margin most of the ideas come from Warren,” he
said. Yet for someone as insular as Bu ett, having the counsel of
the brilliant Munger, who observed the battle at a distance, was
vital.
The merger also gave Berkshire a majority stake in Blue Chip
Stamps. In e ect, Bu ett had just one “pocket” left—Berkshire
Hathaway. He had no portfolio on the side: virtually no personal
investments.32 But Berkshire, which he had rescued from the dead
end of textiles, was itself “personal.”
In his rst decade, Bu ett had engineered a rise in Berkshire’s
net worth from roughly $20 a share to $95. He had transformed
the company, now unrecognizable as its former self, by acquiring
an insurance unit, a bank, a stock portfolio, and majority stakes in
Blue Chip, See’s, and Wesco.
Another chief executive might have renamed the company to
re ect the changes—maybe “BH Corp.” or “Berkshire Enterprises.”
But Bu ett was not a changeling. He liked the name, which evoked
the company’s origins. Though an unsentimental man, he asked
Ken Chace to dig up the old directors’ notes from the archives in
New Bedford and ship them to Omaha. As Bu ett explained to the
SEC, Berkshire was something he intended never to sell.
I just like it. Berkshire is something that I would be in the rest of my life. It is public,
but it is almost like the family business now.33

Not long-term, but the rest of his life. His career—in a sense, his
life—was subsumed in that one company. Everything he did, each
investment, would add a stroke to that never-to-be- nished canvas.
And no one could seize the brush from him, as Bu ett had seized it
from Seabury Stanton. By the late seventies, Bu ett owned 43
percent of the stock, and Susie owned another 3 percent. To gain
control of Berkshire and of its Blue Chip subsidiary, Bu ett had
invested $15.4 million. That was the equivalent of $32.45 per

share of Berkshire.34 And that was all the capital that Bu ett would
put into it. Any further re nement of that canvas—any rise in
Berkshire’s valuation, and any increase in Bu ett’s personal
fortune—would ow from that investment of $32.45 a share, and
from what he could do with it.
* Book value is a useful gauge for most banks. Since a bank’s assets consist of loans and other
nancial assets, intangibles such as brand names are usually insigni cant.

† Munger liquidated his partnership in 1976. His compound annual growth rate from 1962 to
1975 was 20 percent.

Chapter 10

WASHINGTON REDUX

When Warren Bu ett parachuted into her company, Katharine
Graham was midway through the signal transformation of her life.
Her father had purchased the Washington Post, the fth newspaper
in a ve-paper town, out of bankruptcy, in 1933. Kay assumed
control in 1963 when her brilliant, but ultimately deranged,
husband put a shotgun to his temple. As little as anyone could
prepare for such a blow, Graham seemed, more than most, at the
mercy of events. The daughter of Eugene Meyer, a nancier-cumstatesman and head of the Federal Reserve Board, and a worldly
but indi erent mother, Graham grew up with the peculiar
loneliness of the rich. She was raised in a world of governesses and
private schools, and was accustomed to receiving replies to her
letters from her mother’s personal secretary.1 As a young woman,
Graham worked as a reporter, but had no expectation that the
family paper would be hers to run.2 With marriage, she turned to
raising a family.
When she was catapulted to authority, she was shy, selfconscious, and painfully self-abasing. Her male colleagues were
condescending,3 and Graham herself proclaimed in an interview
that, given the way the world worked, “a man would be better in

this job than a woman.”4 She expected to be only an interim
caretaker.5 In fact, responsibility proved a tonic. The Post, at the
time, was an intelligent but parochial newspaper. Graham hired
Benjamin Bradlee, the Washington bureau chief of Newsweek, to
run the paper, and Bradlee, with signi cant support from Graham,
propelled the Post to the front ranks of American journalism. In
1971, when the Post Co. was in the midst of an initial public stock
o ering, Graham overrode her wobbly-kneed advisers and
published the Pentagon Papers, the government’s secret history of
the Vietnam War, despite threats of indictment from the Nixon
administration.6 (The U.S. government had already won a
restraining order halting publication in the New York Times, which
had broken the story.) Then Graham backed the Post’s investigation
of Watergate, despite a challenge, presumably Nixon-instigated, to
the Post Co.’s television licenses in Florida. When John N. Mitchell,
Nixon’s Attorney General, observed with regard to a pending story,
“Katie Graham is gonna get her tit caught in a big fat wringer if
that’s published,”7 Graham knew that she had arrived.
But the second act of her metamorphosis had barely begun.
Despite its clout in political circles, the Post Co. was unimpressive
as a business. Its agship newspaper dominated the Washington
market, yet its pro t margin was an uninspiring 10 percent. A like
condition prevailed at its television stations.
In 1971, when the Post had gone public, Graham had begun to
shift her attention toward the bottom line. But she had left
nancial matters to her board chairman and adviser, the lawyer
Fritz Beebe. As Graham put it, “I sort of thought gures were for
men.” Then, in the spring of 1973, Beebe died. Graham now
became the rst woman chairman of a Fortune 500 company. She
gamely declared to security analysts that she hoped to win a
gurative Pulitzer Prize in management.8 But the world of Wall
Street terri ed her. As it happened, this was precisely when Bu ett
began to buy her stock.
Graham had met Bu ett once, through Charlie Peters of the
Washington Monthly. Still, she had no idea who Bu ett was or what
he was up to. Within the Post Co., the alarm was general. Kay’s

son Donald, then working his way up the ranks, feared that the
company was being pursued by some “super-right-wing type from
Nebraska.”9 Kay herself was petri ed. She made inquiries about
Bu ett with publisher friends—“stalked him like a dog circling a
snake,” according to Bradlee. This was unnecessary, because the
Post had two classes of stock. Only the Class B stock, which had
very limited voting rights, traded publicly. Control of the company
rested in the A shares, which were owned by the Graham family.
But Kay was new to the game. Peter Derow, senior vice president
at the Post’s Newsweek division, kept telling her, “Don’t worry
about it. You’ve got the A shares.” But Graham was scared sti .
She’d say, “What is he up to? Someone is making a run for us!”
Bu ett suspected that as a 10 percent shareholder he might ru e
some feathers. He wrote her a letter—“Dear Mrs. Graham …”—in
which he recalled his escapades as a Post paperboy and disclaimed
any hostile intent.10 She took this to a couple of streetwise friends,
André Meyer of Lazard Frères and Robert Abboud, a Chicago
banker. Each warned that Bu ett’s charm could be a ruse, and
recommended that she not go near him.
If anything, Graham relied too heavily on advisers. But in this
case, she went with her instincts. She wrote to Bu ett, suggesting
that they get together, and when Graham was visiting the Los
Angeles Times, Bu ett drove up from his home in Laguna Beach.
They spent what Graham recalled as a perfectly pleasant hour
together. Bu ett, sensing that she was apprehensive, o ered to
stop accumulating stock.11 Though still uncertain about her suitor,
Graham invited him to see the paper when he was in the East.
Warren and Susie checked into Washington’s Madison Hotel, a
block from the Post, during a tense time. The pressmen were in a
slowdown, and cops and union men were squaring o in the
streets. Bu ett managed to borrow a black tie and scooted his wife
to dinner chez Graham, where he sat between Barbara Bush and
Jane Muskie. Then he waited for Graham to make a move.
But none came. Finally, Tom Murphy, the Capital Cities
chairman and Bu ett’s pal, had lunch with Graham and suggested
that she ought to invite Bu ett onto her board. When Graham

visited Bu ett at Laguna, he was still trying to please. He bought
an umbrella and beach chair—which got a big rise out of Bu ett’s
family, who had never seen him near the water. Graham inched
closer. She said, “Someday, I’d like you to be on the board.” Bu ett
said, “Well, what are you waiting for?” When Bu ett drove her
back to Los Angeles, she said, “If you want to tell me something,
do so, but do it gently. If people bark at me, I’m apt to curl up.”
Bu ett did not need to be told.
Bu ett became a director in the fall of 1974. The other directors
—a clubby bunch including Graham relatives, Post executives, and
Kay’s friends—were wary of him. Quoting Derow, the Newsweek
executive:
Warren was an outsider from Omaha. He ponies up 10 percent of the company. Our

reaction was, “How come we never heard of him?” It was a little scary. He was the
rst guy at the table who had bought his own seat.

Bu ett, of course, knew this. He would tell the executives why he
liked the Post Co. as an investment and how, in a personal sense,
the paper was a homecoming for him. Like the new guy in the
club, all he talked about was how thrilled he was to be there.
He signed his proxy over to Don Graham (letting Kay’s son and
heir cast Berkshire’s votes)—an unusual show of faith in
management. He also declared in writing that he expected
Berkshire to keep its Post stock “permanently”—another of those
phrases that would have mysti ed the modern portfolio
manager.12 In every way, Bu ett intimated, as he had with Betty
Peters, that he considered himself not just an investor but a
partner.
And Bu ett began to come to Washington often. The night
before directors’ meetings he would put up at Graham’s stately
Georgetown home. Bradlee, not exactly a rube, said, “We were
stage-struck. We didn’t know anybody who had that kind of
dough.”

He seemed to be in awe of us, glamorized by us. And we were awed by him. For years
all he wore was a blue suede jacket. Everybody used to shit on it. I think he wore it for

that reason. At board meetings editors would come by and chat about stories. He really
got o

on that. He loved being involved. He liked the informal relationship that Kay

and I had. Once, we were playing tennis and I drove her back into a fence. Warren said,

“I have to admire anyone who drives his boss into a fence.” He had a marvelous,
contagious enthusiasm.

Post executives were used to thinking of themselves as
journalists-doing the Lord’s work, so to speak. Bu ett began to
sprinkle them with droplets of nance. One time, he popped into
Derow’s o ce and asked about Newsweek. Bu ett gradually got
around to explaining what he saw in the Newsweek franchise—and
used the analogy of a hamburger chain, to keep it simple.
“By the time I nished, I understood it better,” Derow said. “He
was like a laser beam. He got you to focus. But he didn’t make you
feel as if you were stupid.”
In particular, Bu ett became a personal tutor to Graham. When
he came to Washington, he would bring a stack of annual reports
and take her through them, line by line. One day, Bu ett sent her
the back cover of a Walt Disney report, depicting a child asleep in
a stroller. Bu ett’s note: “This is you after the 20th annual report.”
Some of her colleagues thought that Bu ett was manipulating her,
but Graham thought he made sense. He didn’t tell her what to do.
He advised, he counseled. The secret to his seduction was his
patience. It seemed to exert a magnetic pull on her. And the more
she got to know him, the more she liked his ideas.
Before long, Bu ett made a major suggestion—that the Post buy
back a big portion of its own stock. Graham thought this was
crazy. If a company returned its capital, how could it grow?
Bu ett’s point was that overall growth didn’t matter—merely
growth per share. It was like shrinking the number of slices in a
pizza. If the shares could be retired cheaply—and Post stock was
still quite cheap—there would be more cheese on every slice.
Bu ett took her through the math, penciling it out in the booklined study in Georgetown.

When Graham was sold on the idea, she talked it up to other
executives at the Post. They noticed that her vocabulary was
becoming spiced with nancial lingo. She would quote Bu ett
openly and, in the view of some, ad nauseam. She had an irritating
way of responding to a suggestion from the sta by saying, “That’s
interesting—let’s ask Warren.”
A year after Bu ett joined the board, Graham, who was eager to
reduce the chronic oversta ng in the Post pressroom and to
recapture control of it from the militant pressmen’s union, decided
to take a strike at the newspaper.13 Some of the pressmen trashed
the plant, and the strike turned bitter. (An infamous placard
declared of Kay’s late husband: “Phil Shot the Wrong Graham.”)
The Post put out a paper with the help of scabs; however, the
second-place Washington Star began to steal its advertisers.
Graham feared that the Post would win the strike and lose the
war. “What I needed,” she said, “was someone I could rely on
totally.” That would be Bu ett. He promised that he would monitor
the business and warn her if he thought the strike was permanently
jeopardizing the Post’s franchise—which was the raison d’être for his
investment. He never did. After four months, the union was
crushed, and the Post resumed its lead.
Later, Time Inc., which purchased the failing Star, asked the Post
to consider a joint operating agreement, which would reduce costs
and have the civic virtue of keeping Washington a two-paper
town.* Under the formula proposed by Time, each company would
take a designated share of the papers’ combined pro ts.
Bu ett strongly argued against it. In his view, the Post, which
had 66 percent of the circulation in Washington, was on the verge
of seizing the market, and had no need to make nice with number
two. Largely because of Bu ett,14 Graham made a much tougher
countero er, which the Star rejected. Soon after, the Star went out
of business-creating a windfall for the Post.
Graham estimated that she talked to Bu ett “maybe every other
day or so, several times a week.”15 When Graham had to give a
speech, which she found frightening,16 she would call Omaha, and

Bu ett would deliver a perfectly metered response, o -the-cu . She
actually taped their conversations.
He speaks in

nished paragraphs. I’d say, “What?—Could you say that again?” He

can’t do it. It comes so fast he can’t retrace it. It takes your breath away.

Don Danly, Bu ett’s high school pinball chum, was visiting
Bu ett in Omaha once when Graham called. She was worried
about what USA Today could do to the Post, and he was consoling
her. To Danly’s amazement, she kept him on the phone for half an
hour.
After Bu ett had been on the board awhile, he began to push her
to be more self-reliant. One time, she asked him to come to
Washington to negotiate a swap of the Post’s television station in
Washington, plus some cash, for a station in Detroit.
“No,” Bu ett told her. “You do it.”
“Okay, tell me how much to give them,” Graham said.
“No—you gure it out. You can do it.”
But Bu ett’s in uence was felt in virtually every major decision.
In particular, he restrained Graham from jumping into the red-hot
(and expensive) bidding wars for media properties. Graham, as a
relative newcomer, was daunted by such media high- iers as Tom
Murphy, chairman of the quickly growing Capital Cities, and by
Times Mirror, which seemed to be buying everything in sight. And
she was sorely tempted to follow suit.17 Bu ett kept reminding her
that it was okay not to spend the money.
When Barry Bingham, Sr., the Kentucky publisher, o ered to sell
the Louisville Courier-Journal and Times to the Post if Graham would
match a bid by Gannett, she naturally put in a call to Bu ett. He
observed that the price was awfully high, but was careful not to
give explicit advice.18 In a subtle sense, he was more e ective that
way. The schoolmaster had trusted her; now the earnest pupil did
not want to disappoint. “You have to know how eager Kay was,”
Don Graham said of the Courier-Journal. But Kay let it pass.
Another time, David Strassler, the investor who had once tried to
buy Dempster Mill from Bu ett, was pitching a cable company to

the Post. He had dinner with Bu ett and Graham in New York, and
was impressed at how easily they worked together. But Strassler
sensed that his mission was doomed.
“Kay had the hots for cable,” he recalled. “She was sophisticated.
She was thinking in strategic terms. But I said to myself, ‘He won’t
let her pay these kind of numbers.’ ”
It should not be surprising that Graham began to rely on Bu ett
as more than just a business adviser. As a rich widow, she was
mistrustful of potential suitors and somewhat cloistered. Her
brittleness kept people at arm’s length, as did her sti , Brahmin
enunciation. Charlie Peters, of the Washington Monthly, said, “I
think Kay desperately needed a friend.” She found Bu ett
unthreatening, and the two became intimate. Graham invited
Bu ett to her farm in Virginia and to her home on Martha’s
Vineyard. Bu ett countered with invitations to Laguna Beach, and
Graham began to attend meetings of Bu ett’s Ben Graham
investors group.
The two of them had a certain playfulness, arising in part from
their unlike backgrounds and levels of re nement. When Bu ett
talked Graham into visiting Omaha, he knew that she hadn’t the
faintest idea of where it was, and decided to poke some fun at her.
When they got on the plane he asked her to draw a map of the
United States, and to mark the location of Omaha. The map was so
awful that he grabbed for it, intending to stash it as a keepsake,
but Graham nimbly tore it to shreds.
Another time, when they landed at La Guardia, Graham was in a
hurry to make a telephone call and asked if he had a dime. Bu ett
shed a quarter out of his pocket. Not wanting to waste the fteen
cents, he started outside to change it, like any other
multimillionaire from Nebraska. Graham hollered, “Warren, give
me the quarter!”
In Washington, which Bu ett usually visited without his wife, he
squired Graham around town. “Kay widened his circle
enormously,” according to the writer Geo rey Cowan. Another
friend said that “the Washington Post really changed his life. It
changed whom he was exposed to.” Suddenly, Warren Bu ett of

Omaha was mixing with the likes of Henry Kissinger. Liz Smith, the
gossip columnist, reported that Bu ett was the rage since emerging
as “a frequent guest and adviser to the powerful Katharine
Graham.”19 Smith added: “Washington society is agog because Mr.
B. drinks Pepsi-Cola with his meals, no matter how chic the
gathering.” Bu ett did not like splashy a airs, but he liked meeting
bigwigs in the controlled setting of Graham’s home.20
At one VIP dinner, a birthday party for Graham, Malcolm
Forbes, the publisher-cum-cultural connoisseur, brought a fancy
wine that had been bottled the year she was born, and that he
intimated had cost him plenty.21 When the waiter got to Bu ett,
the Pepsi drinker stopped him. “No thanks,” he said, putting a
hand over his glass. “I’ll take the cash.”
Graham told her cook to make hamburgers when Bu ett was in
town, and stocked her Manhattan apartment with Bu ett’s
favorites-greasy peanuts and strawberry ice cream. “When he
arrived,” she said with re exive snobbery, “it was only
cheeseburgers and fried—what do you call them?—french fries, all
of it doused with salt.” Succumbing to the urge to re ne, she got to
him to try haricots verts and spruced up his wardrobe.
Bu ett, on the other hand, took Graham to such cultural
monuments as the Hathaway textile mill in New Bedford. “He
wanted me to see it,” Graham noted. She considered him her
“closest friend” and relied on him for personal as well as business
advice. Bu ett also became a sort of uncle to Graham’s kids. He
was in Washington at least once a month and kept a change of
clothes in the Graham guest room. Even Bu ett’s children were
unsure what to make of it.
During an interview, Graham referred without prompting to the
persistent rumors of a liaison. “I was still young enough”— ftyseven when Bu ett joined the board—“that it raised eyebrows.”
Tom Murphy called on Bu ett, too, she said defensively. “If I used
him it was sort of frowned on.”
Bu ett had an unusual number of woman friends—Fortune writer
Carol Loomis, Ruth Muchemore, Barbara Morrow. Morrow thought
him a “feminist,” in the sense of treating women as people. “There

is a sensitivity toward women,” she said. Bu ett had an aspect of
the now so unfashionable chivalry. He detested coarseness and o color jokes, though he did go in for a tactful variety of bedroom
humor.†
Susie was very relaxed about Warren’s having women friends.
When someone called her attention to all the time that Warren was
spending in Washington, Susie replied—Susie could say such things
without blushing—that she wasn’t interested in the form of things,
but in the purity of your heart. (When the Bu etts were in
Washington, both of them stayed at Graham’s.)
But, by the mid-seventies, the Bu etts’ lives had become
somewhat disjointed. Susie had done so much catering to Warren;
now, she told a friend, she wanted to arrange her own calendar.22
She was active in a campaign to save a local high school, which
was losing students due to racial problems. She also began to
travel a bit by herself. She certainly had no interest in Warren’s
work. Peter, who was the last child at home, noticed that the
household was getting pretty loose. Dad was often in Washington;
Mom often seemed to be out. Peter was xing a lot of his own
dinners.
Bu ett sensed that his wife needed a Washington Post in her life.
At one point, referring to their nearly grown kids, he said, “Susie,
you’re like somebody who has lost his job after twenty-three years.
Now what are you going to do?”23
Susie’s dream was to be a chanteuse. This was no surprise to the
family, given her habit of traipsing around in song while Warren
was working. Now that she had some free time, she worked out
tunes with a local band, the Bob Edson Trio, and performed at
some private parties. The prospect of going public unnerved her,
but Warren pushed her, telling her that if she chickened out she’d
regret it later.24 In 1975, with the help of a friend, Eunie
Denenberg, Susie overcame her fright and appeared for a run at
the Steam Shed, a nightclub on the outskirts of Omaha.
After that, she took her lounge act to the French Café, a
restaurant in Omaha’s artsy cobblestone market district. The café
was owned by a pair of well-traveled Omahans, Michael Harrison,

a dancer, and Anthony Abbott, and was something of a cultural
outpost. Susie had once used the café to host a bene t for Planned
Parenthood (Charlton Heston turned up and ate nothing but caviar
at $175 a pound). Another time, she staged a bene t for African
relief—dressed, like her guests, in a billowing gingham dress, a
bandanna, and bare feet.25 In Omaha, it was considered odd, to
say the least, for a fortyish housewife to take to the stage. But the
town had known Warren’s wife to be a free spirit before such
things were popular.
At the French Café, Susie performed in a darkened stone cellar,
looking slinky and sexy and glittering in sequins. She was prettier
than when she had gotten married—high cheekbones, a great bob
of brown hair, and big searching eyes. Her speaking voice was a
bit thin, but when she sang it had a throaty character. She did
stylized jazz and popular tunes, such as the melancholy Stephen
Sondheim number “Send in the Clowns.” Her rst run lasted six
weeks. She drew good crowds, and the audiences were responsive.
Kent Bellows, an Omaha artist, said, “Susie was a cabaret singer—
all passion and nuance. I remember seeing Warren there one
night. Seeing the expression on his face. He was digging it.”
When Susie was onstage, Bu ett would watch with a beati c
expression, as if overcome by rapture. He told a friend, “When
Susie sings, it is so beautiful I can’t breathe.”26
Bu ett would make similar doe-eyed remarks about their
o stage lives. He often commented that he had been unhappy until
he had met Susie, or that he wouldn’t have turned out well without
her.27 As a couple, they did not t a normal pattern. Though their
interests, and increasingly their schedules, were separate, Bu ett
remained extremely attached to her. Even now, she would nestle
next to him and take his hand in public as though they were
teenagers. Knowing that she was his muse, she seemed incapable
of saying no to him.28
Bu ett’s companionship with Kay Graham contrasted markedly.
She depended on him, owing to her lack of nancial experience,
and also to her insecurity. And Bu ett was helpful to her, as he
was, if on a lesser scale, with other colleagues. He was intent on

making a pro t in the Post Co., of course, but that hardly
diminishes the fact that he was animated by Graham, and that he
was personally quite generous with her.
Stan Lipsey, the publisher, observed Bu ett and Graham together
on a trip to Niagara Falls. “I don’t know the answer,” Lipsey said,
“but I didn’t get the vibes you get from people who are sleeping
together. Kay is very powerful, and also very shy. Nine hundred
and ninety-nine out of one thousand people would think twice
about what they are saying to her. Warren didn’t. And they
became con dants.”
It is doubtful that either “answer” would explain why Bu ett
thrived in the relationship. The annual reports that he brought her
probably had more to do with it. Bu ett delighted in playing the
teacher, as he had in his letters to his partners, and Graham was a
very intriguing, very receptive student. A Post director said, “It
was kind of goofy. She would have these pre-meeting dinners. And
we’d all leave. And Warren wouldn’t go. I never saw anything
sexual about it.”
What executives did see was that the Bu ett-Graham alliance
had a far-reaching impact on the business, and ultimately on
Bu ett’s investment. It was impossible to get Graham to open her
checkbook, a fact that they blamed, quite rightly, on Bu ett. Joel
Chaseman, the head of broadcasting, had a chance to buy a
television station in Orlando, before the city’s full explosion as a
mecca for tourists, for $120 million. “It was a hell of a buy,” he
noted. “You could already tell it would be a great market. But
somewhere in the murk and mist of the upper levels of the
corporation it got turned down.”
Murk and mist? Graham had called Bu ett, who said it was
overpriced.29
The litany of such forgone chances drove Post executives to
despair. Bu ett was cool to cellular and to cable TV because they
required a lot of capital.30 (The reason he had invested in the Post
was that its publishing and television properties—as distinct from,
say, an airline—produced free cash ow. The pro ts were not
sucked back into the business.) He was skeptical of start-ups and of

new technology because they were, well, new. They’d be like
switching from hamburgers to foreign foods.
If Bu ett couldn’t see a business, he wasn’t comfortable with it.
It wasn’t enough for him to get an expert’s assurance on a new
project, which is what the typical executive relies on. If he didn’t
understand a venture—he, personally—he felt that he’d be
speculating. And Bu ett wouldn’t do that.
Graham’s dependence on Bu ett caused the Post to miss some
opportunities. Tom Murphy, the self-assured CEO of Cap Cities,
also conferred with Bu ett, but adopted his suggestions selectively.
But Graham, who presided over a revolving door in the executive
suite, went to Bu ett even on matters that were outside his
expertise. And Bu ett’s conservatism came to permeate the board.
Chaseman, who before joining the Post had launched the allnews format at WINS radio in New York, proposed in the late
seventies that the Post start an all-news cable program. Ted Turner
was developing the same idea. At the Post it never got past the
rst board meeting. “I don’t think they were prepared to buy
anything. It was the antithesis of an entrepreneurial company,”
Chaseman said. He was so frustrated that he tried to spin o the
Post’s broadcasting unit into a separate company. Mark Meagher,
the Post’s president, wrote a long letter when he resigned, urging
that the Post go private—since, as he saw it, there was no point in
such a stodgy company holding public capital. Richard Simmons,
who replaced Meagher, dryly remarked after yet another proposal
had been killed, “The sage of Omaha has spoken again.”31
The funny thing was, the Post executives didn’t really dispute
Bu ett’s reasoning. Meagher, in a comment that is typical of the
bunch, says, “I didn’t disagree. Prices were high.” Also, on a
personal level, the executives found Bu ett impossible to dislike.
Simmons, like some of the others, made a pilgrimage to Omaha, a
trip that invariably included a steak dinner, a leisurely tour of
Bu ett’s childhood haunts, and an earful of his wisdom.
Bu ett didn’t say much during the Post’s board meetings. But
occasionally a comment would spark him. At one meeting, Je rey
Epstein, a young M.B.A. who was scouting for new elds of

investment, gave an overview of what consumers were spending in
each part of the media and entertainment industry. His gure for
home entertainment was $5 billion.
Bu ett’s bushy eyebrows went up about three feet. “That $5
billion is a pretty interesting number,” he noted. “That means if
there are twenty million teenagers in the United States they are all
spending $20 every month on video.” That was how his mind
worked: numbers, numbers. It was suddenly clear that Epstein’s
gure, if true, was unsustainable. Needless to say, the Post did not
go into video.‡
It is striking how little the Post did do during Bu ett’s tenure on
the board. Over eleven years, it started and folded a sports
magazine; it bought a newspaper in Washington state and sold one
in Trenton; and it acquired small interests in cellular phones and
other areas, some of which were subsequently sold. But 98 percent
of the pro ts derived, as before, from the Washington Post,
Newsweek, and four television stations.
Meanwhile, its revenue grew at a solid but unspectacular rate of
12 percent a year. The only dramatic change was in the level of
pro tability. In 1974, the company earned an operating pro t of
ten cents for each dollar of sales; in 1985, the gure was nineteen
cents. Similarly, the return on equity doubled.
Of course, the Post would have won the newspaper war in
Washington without Bu ett. And he had little to do with the
doubling of pro t margins at its television stations.
His main contribution came after the pro ts had been earned.
Bu ett gave the Grahams a way of thinking about the business that
was oriented to the shareholders, and at a time when media
companies were devoted to acquiring empires. He insistently
reminded them—as he had Ken Chace, so many years earlier,
outside the textile mill—that size was not the goal; the return to
shareholders was. Opportunities were missed, but he saved the Post
from the business error that is truly a tragic error—throwing the
pro ts from a good business into a bad one.
Instead, at Bu ett’s urging, the Post used its excess cash to retire
7.5 million of its own shares, or about 40 percent of the total. Net

pro ts grew seven times over, but the earnings per share—the
cheese on each slice—grew by a factor of ten.
Of course, media companies in general were prospering in those
years. But by the single yardstick that mattered to Bu ett—
translating the pro ts into rewards for the investors—the Post
outclassed the eld.
Consider that over those eleven years, 1974 to 1985, the Post
earned an extraordinary average of twenty-three cents for each
dollar of the shareholders’ capital. Cap Cities and Times Mirror
each earned a none too shabby, but inferior, nineteen cents.
The Post’s stock rose at the astounding compound rate of 35
percent a year. With dividends, the total return was 37 percent a
year. Cap Cities did a heroic 32 percent, and Times Mirror a stillimpressive 24 percent. But the Post was better. And by the end of
1985, when Bu ett would leave the board, Berkshire’s $10 million
investment would be worth $205 million.
Shortly after Bu ett joined the Post’s board, he began to renew his
interest in another old corporate ame, also in Washington and
also from his youth. GEICO had been a tiny company when Bu ett,
while at Columbia, had taken the train to Washington and knocked
on its door. In the ensuing years, it grew dramatically. Lorimer
Davidson, who had patiently taken Bu ett’s questions that longpast Saturday, rose to chief executive, and GEICO became one of
the biggest auto insurers in the country.
However, by the early seventies, Davidson had retired and
GEICO had new management, led by Ralph C. Peck. The climate
had also changed; insurers were being battered by new no-fault
laws and rising in ation. Peck, trying to grow his way out of such
problems, relaxed the company’s historic policy of accepting only
the lowest-risk drivers—even while maintaining its generally low
prices.32 Inevitably, premium volume soared and the cash poured
in.
For a while, all seemed rosy. Alas, GEICO’s higher-risk drivers,
not surprisingly, were ling more claims. Moreover, in ation was

raising the cost of xing the bodies and cars that GEICO was
insuring.
To compound the problem, GEICO’s management didn’t
adequately reserve for losses. For a critical fteen months in 1974
and 1975, the company denied, belittled, or lied about the problem
—both to Wall Street and to itself.33 Lorimer Davidson, still on the
board, bitterly complained as the company was wrecked. But even
he did not suspect how bad it was.
We found out when the board retained an independent actuarial

rm. We got the

report the day before Christmas, 1975. It was some Christmas present. We had $50
million to make up—to our horror—and we didn’t have the money.

Early in 1976, GEICO announced a staggering $126 million loss
for the previous year. As recently as 1974, the stock had hit a high
of 42. Now it was quoted at 4⅞.
Bu ett had long since sold his small holding in GEICO, but he
had harbored a secret desire to revisit the company in a big way,
just as he had the Washington Post.34 For someone so rational,
Bu ett was sentimental about his past (though not so misty-eyed as
to invest in GEICO when the stock was dear). But now, GEICO was
cheap. What’s more, it was in deep trouble. And Ben Graham, who
had been chairman of GEICO when Bu ett had been at Columbia,
still had his savings in it. Helping to salvage the company would
be a sort of double fantasy: following in Graham’s footsteps and
rescuing his company.
Graham was then living quietly and modestly with his mistress,
Malou, part of the year in La Jolla and part in Aix-en-Provence. At
his eightieth-birthday party, when his family gathered in La Jolla,
he movingly looked back on his life, without mentioning his career
on Wall Street. He spoke of the pleasure he had gotten from
beauty, literature, and art, and also from varied female
companions, and recalled, as a boy, seeing Mark Twain in his later
years, “resplendent in his white suit and curly white hair.”35
However, Graham had not lost interest in stocks. He had an
account in La Jolla, and though he rarely traded, the father of

security analysis would go to his broker’s and sit unobtrusively at a
corner desk, reading his beloved Standard & Poor’s. A broker who
visited Graham found a book of Greek on his desk and a Rodin
sculpture in the living room.36
At about the time of GEICO’s troubles, Graham asked Bu ett to
coauthor a revised edition of The Intelligent Investor. They
corresponded, but Bu ett found that he and his teacher had some
basic disagreements. Bu ett wanted a section on how to identify
“great businesses” (such as See’s Candy); Graham didn’t think the
average reader could do it. Also, Graham recommended a ceiling of
75 percent of one’s assets in stocks; the gamer Bu ett was willing
to invest his whole kitty if prices were right.37 Bu ett felt so
strongly that he gave up being Graham’s coauthor and instead was
simply acknowledged inside the book as a “collaborator.”
Ironically, no stock was as suggestive of their philosophical rift
as GEICO. Graham would have said that it lacked a margin for
safety—which, given that the company was on the verge of failure,
it certainly did. Bu ett sensed an opportunity if the management
could be righted, and he was following its drama closely.
In April 1976, when GEICO held its annual meeting, four
hundred shareholders jammed into the Washington Statler Hilton,
where they all but hooted the o cers o the premises.38 Within a
month, Peck was booted out, and John J. Byrne, Jr., a forty-threeyear-old veteran of Travelers, was tapped to succeed him. Byrne
moved with exceptional force. In New Jersey, he visited James J.
Sheeran, the state insurance commissioner, to demand a rate
increase. When it was clear that Byrne was getting nowhere, he
pulled a paper from his pocket, slammed it on Sheeran’s desk, and
said, “Here’s your fucking license. We are no longer a citizen of the
state of New Jersey.” Then he summarily red seven hundred
employees and noti ed 300,000 policyholders in the state to nd
another insurer.
Nationwide, Byrne closed one hundred o ces and cut the
workforce nearly in half.39 But it wasn’t enough. The insurance
superintendent in Washington, D.C., was threatening to shut him
down unless GEICO could get other insurers to pick up a portion of

its policies (providing what is known as reinsurance). Byrne
appeared to have gotten their okay, but early in July, State Farm,
the industry leader, backed out on him, as did Travelers.40
GEICO’s fortunes were now at a low. Bu ett was acutely
interested in getting involved—though, as usual, he had someone
else smooth his entree. Kay Graham, doing his bidding, called
Byrne and said, “I have a houseguest I’d like you to meet.” Byrne
said some other time. Then Byrne got a call from Lorimer
Davidson, GEICO’s elder statesman, who asked if it was true that
Byrne had snubbed Warren Bu ett. Hearing that he had, Davidson
snapped, “How can you be so dumb? Get your ass down there.”
Byrne showed up at the Graham mansion in July, the night
before a Post board meeting. GEICO’s stock was at 2.§ This once
seemingly invincible company was on the brink of becoming the
biggest failed insurer ever—in Bu ett’s words, “the Titanic of the
insurance world.”41
As Bu ett led Byrne to the stately, high-ceilinged library, he had
an eerie recollection of when he had banged on GEICO’s door
twenty- ve years earlier and been led by a janitor to Lorimer
Davidson. Though his circumstances were vastly changed, his
modus operandi was not. Once more, he was eager to learn all he
could about GEICO. As the ruddy-faced Byrne recalled, Bu ett
pumped him for hours.
We talked to maybe 2:00, 3:00 A.M. He wanted to know the things I would do. What
did I think of our ability to survive? I remember we talked late at night about families,

other stu . But mostly the conversation was GEICO. I’m sure I did 80 percent of the
talking.

There was little Byrne could tell Bu ett that he didn’t already
know. GEICO had the same low-cost method of operation (based
on not having sales agents) that had always given it an edge. In
rough terms, GEICO spent fteen cents of each premium dollar on
expenses, whereas other insurers spent an average of twenty-four
cents.42 This enabled GEICO to charge less, and thus be more
selective about choosing customers. In recent years, of course,

GEICO had abandoned this sure re formula. But its underlying cost
advantage was intact. Bu ett gured that if it survived the present
crisis, its pro tability would return.
Bu ett’s genius was to see this even when GEICO was in total
chaos and on the verge of bankruptcy. Like American Express in
the sixties, it was “a magni cent business going through a time of
trouble.”43 And even in that troubled time, he could envision the
storm’s passing.
On this evening, Bu ett wanted to take the measure of Byrne
personally. And Byrne impressed him. He spoke like an owner as
distinct from a manager or bureaucrat. He was decisive and
energetic, as the crisis required. Perhaps he was too volatile to lead
the troops in peace. But as a wartime general, Bu ett thought him
a brilliant choice.
I didn’t ask, “How long is it going to take, Jack?” In the end, you
can’t predict. [But] Jack clearly understood the dimensions of the
problem.44
Somehow, Byrne would get it done. And if he did, the stock could
prove to be a tremendous bargain—maybe even better than that.
Bu ett got up a few hours after Byrne left and called Ronald
Gutman, his broker at Goldman Sachs. He bought 500,000 shares at
2⅛ and left a standing order for shares “in the multimillions.”45 At
the Post board meeting, a light-headed Bu ett confessed, “I’ve just
invested in something that might go under. I could lose the entire
investment next week.” But once he had started it was not in his
nature to stop. Berkshire quickly invested more than $4 million in
GEICO stock.
Byrne said later, “That night at Kay’s was the turning point.” But
GEICO was far from out of the woods. It needed, rst, to convince
the regulators to give it time, and second, to persuade competitors
to provide it with reinsurance and thus limit GEICO’s exposure to
losses.
Bu ett took a piece of the reinsurance for Berkshire, and also
paid a call on Maximilian Wallach, the D.C. insurance
superintendent.46 In essence, Bu ett argued that if Berkshire

thought enough of GEICO’s future to stake a few million bucks on
it, maybe Wallach shouldn’t be so quick to close it down.
Byrne, meanwhile, got other insurers to agree to take the
reinsurance—but only with a big “if.” As part of the deal, GEICO
had to raise new capital. Byrne went to eight rms on Wall Street
and was bounced out of every one. In desperation, he turned to
Salomon Brothers, a still-smallish trading rm.
John Gutfreund, Salomon’s blunt-spoken second-in-command,
had already rejected GEICO. However, a junior research analyst
named Michael Frinquelli had invited Byrne to give a presentation
to Salomon over lunch. Since Byrne was going to be in the building
anyway, Gutfreund agreed to let him come by his o ce when he
was done.
When Byrne sat down, Gutfreund removed his cigar and gave
him a pouting sneer. “I don’t know who’d ever buy that fucking
reinsurance treaty you’re trying to sell,” Gutfreund said.
Byrne, answering in kind, replied, “You don’t know any fucking
thing you’re talking about.”47
Impressed with this display of virility, Gutfreund showed Byrne
the door and told Frinquelli, the Salomon analyst, to research
GEICO and write up a recommendation. Frinquelli concluded that
GEICO could be saved, and ought to be saved. If restored to health,
he said, it would be valuable to policyholders and pro table for
investors. Gutfreund also was reassured by the news of Bu ett’s
investment.48
In August, Gutfreund agreed to underwrite a $76 million o ering
of GEICO preferred. This was a gutsy move. GEICO was thought to
be so risky that no other rm would join in a syndicate, as usually
occurs, meaning that if the o ering failed, Salomon would be on
the hook for the entire $76 million.
When a lawyer on the deal pestered the bankers over some
detail, Gutfreund snapped, “What are you worried about? It’s only
your job. It’s our money.”49 In November, days before the o ering,
it appeared that Salomon would take a major loss.50
Shortly before the underwriting, Bu ett told Gutfreund that he’d
be willing to take the entire allotment—and named his price.51

Byrne wanted to sell it at $10.50 a share, but Gutfreund, knowing
Bu ett’s ceiling, insisted on $9.20. He wouldn’t budge—not by a
penny. Bu ett was his backup.
The o ering turned out to be a hit. Bu ett took 25 percent of it,
giving Berkshire a total investment of $23 million. Thanks to a
curious Catch-22, the investment, once made, was no longer risky
—because the fact of the added capital took GEICO out of peril. In
Byrne’s view, the hero of the rescue was Gutfreund, who had
stepped up with capital when no one else would.52 Bu ett also was
impressed with him. Gutfreund evidently was his kind of
investment banker.
Within six months, GEICO rose to 8⅛—a quadrupling. That was
only a faint indication of its potential. Over the next few years,
Berkshire doubled its stake, making Bu ett the controlling
investor. GEICO seemed to go through a Bu ett mold—Bu ett had
that e ect on companies. GEICO, like the Washington Post,
repurchased its own shares; GEICO’s boss, too, made a habit of
calling on Bu ett. It was Bu ett-ized. Byrne was an experienced
pro, but his business relationship with Bu ett was not so very
di erent from Kay Graham’s. Quoting Byrne:
I’d ask him all kinds of things. He showed me sensible ways to

nance. He was

generous with his time. But he never—ever—made suggestions. Warren gured out a

long time ago that he could make a lot more money for Berkshire by being a
benevolent shareholder. This guy made a lot of money by backing up the truck.

Once a year, Bu ett would do a Q&A with GEICO’s executives.
Onstage, he was a natural. He had the Casey Stengel technique of
avoiding overliteralness by treating questions as general prompts.
He would segue into a little story, which usually had an investment
moral, but which he told in an utterly simple style. He was
informal, yet picked his words with exquisite precision. You
couldn’t not be drawn in.
Byrne swears that people at GEICO canceled vacations so as not
to miss the show. One time, Bu ett said an investor should
approach the stock market as if he had a lifetime punch card.

Every time he bought a stock he punched a hole. When the card
had twenty holes he was done—no more investing for life.
Obviously, the investor would lter out every idea but the best.
Lou Simpson, who was managing GEICO’s portfolio, said this
parable had a profound impact on him.
Bu ett, in fact, had this punch-for-life conviction in GEICO, and
went out of his way to let Byrne know it, both privately and in
Berkshire’s published reports. In an era when managers were
increasingly under the gun to raise their stock or face a takeover,
Bu ett wanted Byrne to manage for the long term, and
emphasized that he wouldn’t sell him out.
This was put to a test when a Fortune 500 company made a
serious bid to acquire GEICO. Byrne called Bu ett and asked what
he thought. Bu ett said, “It’s up to you.” Byrne said, “Oh, come on
—you gotta give me more than that.” Bu ett said nothing, but
agreed to accompany Byrne to a late-night bargaining session at
the Waldorf-Astoria, in New York.
The suitor and his bankers naturally addressed themselves to
Bu ett, the controlling stockholder. Bu ett said, “You’re talking to
the wrong guy. He [Byrne] is the one you have to convince.” Byrne
took Bu ett aside and pleaded, “At least whisper a price in my
ear.” Bu ett stayed mum.
“It was amazing,” Byrne said. “We were talking a billion dollars
or so. He left it in my hands.”
Finally, Byrne named a price that was out of the buyer’s range,
and the talks ended. That was surely the outcome that Bu ett, who
gured that GEICO’s best days were still ahead, had wanted. So
why had he played around? “It’s hard to know what’s going on in
Warren’s mind,” Byrne admitted.
No doubt, Bu ett wanted Byrne to know that he trusted him.
And he must have guessed that if he showed his faith, Byrne would
not want to let him down. One could say that Bu ett was lucky,
except that he got lucky too often.
Reminiscing on the GEICO roller coaster, Walter Schloss,
Bu ett’s buddy from Graham-Newman, said the entire saga “was
pathetic in a way. Some people became millionaires, some didn’t

bene t at all, and others went broke.”53 Leo Goodwin, Jr., the son
of GEICO’s founder, bailed out at the low, a bankrupt. And Ben
Graham kept his GEICO to the bottom. In September 1976, just
before the bailout was completed, Graham died at his home in
France. He was eighty-two.
After Graham’s death, commentators often remarked on Bu ett’s
departure from Graham’s methodology. Quite obviously, Bu ett
evolved. He was in uenced by Charlie Munger and by the writerinvestor Philip Fisher, each of whom stressed good, well-managed
companies as distinct from statistically cheap ones.54 And he was
in uenced by his own experience.
Bu ett analyzed companies more subjectively than Graham, and
he found “intrinsic value” in companies, such as See’s Candy, that
Graham would not have touched. But these deviations tend to
obscure a larger delity. The very idea that a stock had an
“intrinsic” worth, independent of the tape, Bu ett got from Ben
Graham. Indeed, it is nearly impossible to imagine Bu ett’s
quitting the partnership at the height of the Go-Go years, or
jumping back in during the 1974 market depression, had he not
read Graham’s liberating parable of Mr. Market. Bu ett’s eulogy
for Graham, written for the Financial Analysts Journal, stressed,
precisely, the endurance of Graham’s approach:
In an area where much looks foolish within weeks or months after publication, Ben’s

principles have remained sound—their value often enhanced and better understood in
the wake of nancial storms that demolished imsier intellectual structures.55

Some years later, Bu ett admitted that the stocks he was buying
were entirely di erent from those that Graham would buy. What
he had retained from Graham was “the proper temperamental
set”—that is, the principle of buying value, the conservatism
embedded in Graham’s margin of safety principle, and the attitude
of detachment from the daily market gyrations.56
Bu ett did not stop thinking of himself as one of Graham’s
followers, nor did he lose his personal feeling for the teacher who
had treated him with an “open-ended, no-scores-kept generosity.”57

Much later, when Bu ett was speaking to the author about
Bu ett’s own career, he remarked with unmistakable a ection:
“The best thing I did was to choose the right heroes. It all comes
from Graham.” When the author mentioned that he had spoken to
some of Graham’s children, Bu ett’s voice suddenly broke. “I wish
you could talk to Graham,” he replied.
* The Newspaper Preservation Act of 1970 permits competing papers to combine the

business side of their operations while retaining separate editorial sta s—if it can be shown
to the Department of Justice that one of the papers may otherwise go under.

† One time in California, the Bu etts and Roy and Martha Tolles were strolling past a tourist

shop that had a help-wanted sign next to some rather skimpy bikinis in the window. Bu ett
deadpanned, “I wonder if they need a tter.”

‡ The gure was based on shipments to stores—which vastly overstated actual purchases.

Within a year, Atari, the kingpin of video, was rocked by losses and the industry su ered a
shakeout.

§ For comparison with current prices, as of 1994 GEICO had split ve-for-one.

Chapter 11

PRESS LORD

A few days before Christmas, 1976, Bu ett met with Kay Graham,
her son Donald, and Mark Meagher, president of the Post
newspaper division, in the Newsweek o ces in New York. A party
was going on at Newsweek. The Post directors retreated to a
private room and ushered in a visitor—Vincent Manno, a
newspaper broker.1 Manno was hoping to interest the Post in
making a bid for the Bu alo Evening News. Afternoon papers were
a dying breed, but the Evening News had thrived, owing to its
strong reputation and to Bu alo’s demographics. In blue-collar
Bu alo, people rose early and did not read a paper until after
work.
The Evening News also had several negatives. It did not publish
on Sundays—the day readers tended to linger over their paper
and, increasingly, the day most sought after by advertisers.
Bu alo, a rusting steel town, was itself considered a negative—too
old and cold. Worst of all, the paper’s employees were represented
by a total of thirteen unions that had won increasingly good
contracts; of 131 newspapers represented by the Newspaper Guild,
employees at the Evening News had the seventh-highest pay.2

For all that, the Evening News was precisely the dominant, bigcity paper of Bu ett’s dreams. It reached a higher percentage of
local households than any other big-city daily in the country.3 And
Bu alo was a city where habits died hard. Most of its people were
from Bu alo, and had grown up reading the Evening News. Despite
its reputation as a dying city, Bu ett knew that its stable
population was a plus. What’s more, he was hungry—not to advise
a newspaper owner, but to be one. He wanted Graham to know in
advance: if the Post didn’t buy the Bu alo Evening News, then
Warren Bu ett might.4
Founded in 1880, the Evening News, which was establishment
and Republican, had been run by the Butler family, which also
owned a local television station and a fortune in American Airlines
stock. In recent decades, the proprietor had been Kate Robinson
Butler, a grande dame who traveled with her poodle in a RollsRoyce. Butler had built a lavish printing plant, rimmed with
distinctly nonnative tropical plants, and had gone to similar
expense to avoid trouble with unions.5 Employees who had once
tied the papers by hand had continued at their posts after the work
was automated. As papers came o the runway, the workers would
pass their hands over the conveyors, as if o ering a sacrament.
They were known as “blessers.”6 But the family’s stewardship had
ended with Butler’s death, in 1974. Now the paper was up for sale
by her estate.
After the meeting at Newsweek, Graham concluded that the Post,
having just crushed a strike, would be unwelcome in such a union
town. The Tribune Co. of Chicago similarly decided not to bid.7
Manno, the broker, cut the asking price from $40 million to $35
million. Shortly after, he got a call from Bu ett.
“Do you work on Saturdays?” Bu ett inquired.
Manno asked if it was important.
“I think you’ll consider it important.”8
Bu ett and Munger arrived at Manno’s home, in the quaint
community of Weston, Connecticut, the rst Saturday after New
Year’s Day, 1977. They had lunch at Manno’s club, which was
warmed by a blazing re. When they got back to the house, Bu ett

cut to the chase. Bidding on behalf of Blue Chip Stamps,* he o ered
$30 million for the Evening News. Manno demurred. Bu ett raised
the bid to $32 million. Still no dice.
Bu ett and Munger left the room. Their o er was extraordinarily
high, relative to the paper’s meager pro ts. The Evening News had
earned only $1.7 million, pretax, in 1976. But Bu ett knew that it
was capable of earning more. He knew that in city after city,
strong papers had gotten stronger while weaker ones had
oundered or failed. And the Evening News virtually owned the
town. It had twice the daily circulation of its morning competitor,
the Bu alo Courier-Express, and 75 percent more advertising
revenue.9
When Bu ett and Munger returned, a moment later, Munger
scribbled out a formal o er of $32.5 million on a single sheet of
yellow legal paper. That might do, Manno said.10
Directly, an omen arrived in the form of the worst snowstorm in
Bu alo’s history. When Bu ett and Munger arrived to iron out a
contract, the city was still digging out. Munger was uneasy—the
Evening News, after all, was their biggest purchase by far. Touring
the extravagant printing plant, Munger snapped, “Why does a
newspaper need a palace to publish in?”11 Bu ett jokingly dubbed
it Taj Mahal East. But the Evening News was a big step for him. It
was not a stock-market investment but a business owned in entire.
Bu ett would not have Kay Graham to take the punches for him;
he would be personally on the line.
Even before the sale closed, Bu ett seemed to have a strategy in
mind for the paper. When he introduced himself to Murray Light,
the chain-smoking, Brooklyn-born managing editor, Bu ett asked,
“How do you feel about a Sunday paper?” Light said he had been
urging the publisher to start one for years. Bu ett hid his cards, but
Light sensed that he agreed.
After the closing, Light threw a welcoming party for Bu ett at
his home. A gaggle of employees approached the new owner,
standing in the backyard in the warm light of spring. Bu ett
remarked, “News happens twenty-four hours a day, seven days a

week”—an unmistakable clue that he was thinking of expanding to
Sundays.
Rumor had it that the Evening News had refrained from
publishing on Sundays because of a tacit agreement between the
Butlers and the Conners family—owners of the rival CourierExpress. The latter paper was older (the Express had once been
owned by Mark Twain),12 more liberal, and of marginal to no
pro tability. Its Sunday paper was its life-blood, as was evident
from the two newspapers’ respective circulations:13
EVENING NEWS

DAILY COURIER-EXPRESS

SUNDAY COURIER-EXPRESS

268,000

123,000

270,000

The advertising numbers told a similar tale. The Evening News
outsold the Courier-Express during the week by a four-to-one
margin.14 Only the latter’s Sunday paper kept it in business.
Bu ett and Munger thought this balance was unstable. Without a
Sunday edition, they believed, the Evening News eventually would
lose its dominant franchise and possibly, in time, go under. That
summer, the nearby Toronto Daily Star announced that it would
start a Sunday paper. As Bu ett knew, in addition to the Evening
News, only the Cincinnati Post, the Cleveland Press, and the New
York Post—dinosaurs all—remained as big-city dailies without a
Sunday edition.15 Dashing o a note to Munger, he humorously
warned that they should not be the last.
Susie used to say, about my crew cut, that she didn’t mind my being the next-to-the-

last fellow in the country with a crew cut, but she had strong objections to my being
the absolute last. I think our course of action in Bu alo should be obvious.16

Soon after, Bu ett, who held the position of chairman at the
Evening News, told Murray Light to design a Sunday paper—
pronto. Light set up a special task force, and Bu ett would drop in
on them every month or so. Quoting Light:

I’d see my colleagues reach into their jackets to pull out facts and gures which had
been forwarded to Warren’s o ce. When they faltered, Warren would interject and ll
in the blanks. He knew more about the reports than the guys who had written them.

Bu ett was on one of his highs, helping to design a newspaper,
getting involved with ad rates, promotional schemes, pricing. He
dashed o a note to a certain publisher friend: “Kay, I’m having so
much fun with this it is sinful.”17
However, people in Bu alo were afraid that the depressed local
economy would not be able to support two papers in a head-on
clash. As the November start-up neared, some stores, partly for
civic reasons, made plans to advertise in both Sunday papers.
Keith Alford, who ran a department store, said, “Nobody wanted to
lose a paper—from an advertising standpoint or a news
standpoint.” According to Ray Hill, the Newspaper Guild
representative and an Evening News columnist, “We knew the time
had come—one or the other paper would be out of business.”
The Courier-Express knew it too. Two weeks before the fateful
Sunday, it launched a surprise attack, suing the Evening News for
violating the Sherman Anti-Trust Act. Boldly, it demanded a
preliminary injunction to handcu the new Sunday edition before
its scheduled November 13 debut.
The suit charged the Evening News with classic monopolist
behavior. It alleged that Bu ett was planning to use his strength
during the week to subsidize a money-losing paper on Sunday—
analogous to a chain store cutting prices in the one locale that is
across the street from a mom-and-pop competitor.
Mr. Bu ett’s Evening News [is] engaged in … a concerted e ort to use its monopoly
power to eliminate the Courier as a competitor in Bu alo.18

The evidence was said to include the Evening News’s plan to sell
seven papers for the price of six during a ve-week promotional
period, and its intention to sell the Sunday paper for only thirty
cents. The Courier-Express, like papers in Syracuse, Rochester,
Albany, and Bing-hamton, charged fty cents.

Bu ett atly disputed the charge. The Evening News, he asserted,
fully intended to earn a pro t on Sunday. He argued that a new
edition would promote competition, not inhibit it, and made the
obvious point that the Evening News had as much right to publish
on Sunday as anyone, regardless of its e ect.19 Put di erently, it
was not Bu ett’s job to keep a competitor in business. But he had
been badly caught o guard.
Transcripts of the legal papers were printed verbatim in the
Courier-Express, which treated its lawsuit as the story of the
century. Also, Frederick Furth, the Courier-Express’s amboyant San
Francisco litigator, aroused public opinion against the out-of-town
Bu ett, casting him as a carpetbagger out to wreck a local
institution.
The law required the Courier-Express to show that its rival
intended to destroy it. Certain business practices, such as pricing
below cost, were considered unfair, and might weigh in the
Courier-Express’s favor, but the line between merely competitive
tactics and illegal ones was fuzzy. The key question was whether
the Evening News had an intent to monopolize.
As Furth understood, the Courier-Express needed a villain in
whom the evil intent could be personi ed. Warren Bu ett—“Big
Brother from Omaha,” as Furth referred to him in court20—was his
ace in the hole. The guts of his case were that Bu ett was a
numbers-crunching millionaire who had no concern for Bu alo,
and who was intent on driving the Courier-Express out of business
to enhance the value of Bu ett’s own paper.
Bu ett answered in personal terms. As a prelude to appearing in
court, he led an a davit citing his grandfather’s and father’s
associations with newspapers, his background as a paperboy, the
Sun’s Pulitzer:
It is much more than just a business to me. I want to achieve business success in
newspapers but will be unhappy unless it is accompanied by journalistic success.21

On November 4, 1977, as a hard rain came whipping in from
Lake Erie, Bu ett took the stand in the federal courthouse. The

gallery was packed with Courier-Express employees and their
family members, who saw the hearing as a last chance to keep
their livelihoods, and saw Bu ett as a viper. Furth hammered away
at him. Bu ett replied evenly, separating out the needles that were
intended to bait him and responding with facts, facts, facts. He
was like a human backboard; nothing riled him.
Now, at the time that Blue Chip Stamp Company decided to
FURTH

: acquire the News, you made an analysis, did you not, of the
pro t and loss of the News?
I made a mental analysis of the position of the Bu alo
News, its publishing strengths and weaknesses, its past

BUFFETT

: history of earnings, its future potential, the price paid for
newspapers, and other markets. There were a lot of
variables that went into the calculation.
Well, are you saying you didn’t do a written analysis, you

FURTH

: simply massaged the gures, as the current nancial term,
is that—
That is your term. I don’t think I massaged them at all. I

BUFFETT

: tried to analyze the future potential of the Bu alo Evening
News.

FURTH

: You looked at the income for the previous year, didn’t you?

BUFFETT

:

I looked at the income for the previous ve years, the
history of circulation, advertising, a number of factors.22

It was an odd sort of trial: the criminal was known—all that
mattered was the motive. Furth’s strategy was to destroy Bu ett’s
stated rationale and supply his own. Thus: Bu ett did not have an

economic basis for buying the Evening News; he had not made much
of an e ort to learn about the paper—all he had cared about was
getting his hands on it, so he could kill its competitor.
Bu ett patiently countered that he had bought the Evening News
on the basis of his own mental analysis of the facts and gures.
The rationale was in his head. This played to Furth’s strength.
FURTH

And you purchased the newspaper just on the information

:

that [Manno] gave you, is that right?
No, we purchased the newspaper based on some

BUFFETT

:

information he gave us, some information we dug up
ourselves, and a general knowledge of the newspaper
business.

FURTH

BUFFETT

FURTH

You did not come and inspect the plant, the facilities, the

:

presses, talk to the people and do things like that?
: No, we did not.
Now, sir, you had contemplated, had you not, even prior to

:

the acquisition, coming out with the Sunday newspaper?
I thought it was most unusual that a major metropolitan

BUFFETT

: newspaper did not have a Sunday edition. I certainly
intended to investigate the possibility.

FURTH

: Did you have a study done?

BUFFETT

FURTH

:

I don’t have studies done, basically. I look into them
myself.

: You just did it all yourself?

BUFFETT

: Right. The circulation gures and the linage gures are

available from trade publications.23
Perhaps it is necessary to add that the typical businessman does
not spend $32.5 million without commissioning a study, often
several of them. They provide him with a sense of security—the
blessing of supposed experts—even if it is a false security.
Ultimately, someone has to evaluate the facts. The someone ought
to be the CEO, though it takes a rarely self-assured one to appear
before a board without a prop. Bu ett’s instinct was to remove the
layers between the decision and himself. Yet as one who dispensed
with the normal props, he could be made to seem suspect.
FURTH

:

BUFFETT
FURTH

Bu alo?
: Probably once a month on average.

: So you have been here maybe ve, six times?

BUFFETT

FURTH

All right, sir, how many days did you spend here in

:

: Something like that.
And you made your cost estimates based on the ve days
that you have been here since you acquired the paper?
Not based on the ve days. Based on regular nancial
statements I read, based on phone conversations I had,

BUFFETT

: based on a knowledge of the newspaper business plus a
knowledge of some of the aspects of the Bu alo Evening
News’s operation.
Plus your overall knowledge of newspapers, the Washington

FURTH

: Post, the Trenton Times, and all of the other business that
you, your father and grandfather have accumulated?

BUFFETT

: My grandfather didn’t have much to do with it.24

It occurred to Furth’s associate, Daniel Mason, that Bu ett was
wholly unlike what he had expected. Nothing in his unassuming
manner or rumpled suit gave him away—Mason would not in a
million years have thought that the witness was rich.25
Bu ett spoke informally, and also believably. He contended that
people in Bu alo would bene t from having a second Sunday
paper. When the judge, Charles L. Brieant, Jr., asked him to
explain why he thought the Evening News would trail the CourierExpress on Sunday, Bu ett reached for a couple of those earthy
metaphors that he seemed to keep in his pocket.
Well, you assume that the Courier has been publishing for
many, many, many years, all alone in the market—that
people’s habit patterns are very strong. I shave my face on
BUFFETT

: the same side every morning and put on the same shoe rst
and people are creatures of habit. And the product that they
have been receiving every day for a great many years has
an enormous advantage.26

That was how he spoke in private—say, to Kay Graham. Even
on the stand, he talked about business schematically, in big, broad
brushstrokes. However, it was not in Bu ett’s interest to look too
clever. And by the time that Furth went for the knockout, it was
obvious to everyone in the courtroom that Bu ett knew more
about the economics of the Bu alo Evening News than any other
soul alive.
Now, sir, did you consider whether or not your coming out
FURTH

: with this newspaper, the Sunday newspaper, might put the
Courier-Express out of business?

BUFFETT

: No, Sir.

FURTH

: Never ever thought whether it would or not?

BUFFETT

FURTH

:

I think the Courier-Express is going to be in business a long
time.

: That was never discussed; right?

BUFFETT

: No, sir.27

Now Furth had his hook in. Approaching the bench, he waved a
copy of a recent Wall Street Journal article pro ling Bu ett. Furth
read aloud a passage corroborating that, in a general sense,
monopoly newspapers had been very much on Bu ett’s mind:
“Warren likens owning a monopoly or market-dominant newspaper to owning an
unregulated toll bridge. You have relative freedom to increase rates when and as much
as you want.”28

The quote was from Sandy Gottesman, Bu ett’s friend at First
Manhattan. Bu ett tried to dance around it, but the toll-bridge
metaphor was just too good. Everyone knew where it came from.
Now, sir, did you ever tell him that owning a
FURTH

:

monopoly newspaper is like owning an unregulated
toll bridge?
I probably said that owning a monopoly, a small
monopoly newspaper, speci cally in a town like
Fremont, Nebraska, [with] no television

BUFFETT

:

competition, is absolutely a great business. Whether
it is like a toll bridge I don’t remember, but it is a
great business. It may be better than a toll bridge in
Fremont.

JUDGE BRIEANT

:

What is signi cant about Fremont, Nebraska?
Your honor, the newspaper in Fremont, Nebraska,

BUFFETT

:

exists in an advertising vacuum. You can’t make a
television buy in Fremont.

JUDGE BRIEANT:
BUFFETT

:

Do you own a newspaper in—
No. I wish I did.
What you are saying is that owning a monopoly or

FURTH

:

market-dominant paper in a small community is like
owning an unregulated toll bridge; is that right?

BUFFETT

FURTH

very, very good business.
isn’t that true?

:

I wouldn’t put it quite that strongly, but you have
the power to raise rates.
That is the kind of business you like to own; isn’t

:

BUFFETT

I won’t quarrel with that characterization. It is a
Because you can raise rates as much as you want,

:

BUFFETT

FURTH

:

that true?
:

I don’t own any, but I would like to own one.
Now, sir, you have used that word, unregulated toll

FURTH

:

bridge, with others, haven’t you? Isn’t that one of
your phrases?

BUFFETT

FURTH

:

:

I have said in an in ationary world that a toll bridge
would be a great thing to own if it was unregulated.
Why?

BUFFETT

:

Because you have laid out the capital costs. You
build the bridge in old dollars and you don’t have to
keep replacing it.

FURTH

BUFFETT

FURTH

And you used the term unregulated so that you can

:

:

raise prices; is that right?
:

That is true.
And the toll bridge, you assumed, had the monopoly
over the river; is that what you are saying?29

Though Furth couldn’t have known it, Bu ett had fancied tollbooths ever since, as a boy, he had gazed at the tra c cruising
past his friend Bob Russell’s house. And Blue Chip actually did own
24 percent of the stock of Detroit International Bridge Co., the
owner of the Ambassador Bridge between Detroit and Windsor,
across Lake Erie from Bu alo.30 It was a real toll bridge—the only
one owned by stockholders in the United States—and Bu ett
controlled a quarter of it. Furth had missed it. Still, he had drawn
blood.
Blue Chip’s lawyers thought Bu ett had made an outstanding,
and credible, witness. But had he been too credible? Had he
revealed too much of his keenness for dominant businesses? The
vivid toll-bridge metaphor hung over the court.
On November 9—four days before the inaugural Sunday—Judge
Brieant ordered an injunction against the Evening News, pending a
trial. Though technically he did not grant all of what the morning
paper sought, his lengthy opinion—delivered with what seemed
remarkable speed—was devastating.
Judge Brieant ruled that the Courier-Express would likely be able
to prove at a trial that its rival was adopting unfair tactics, that it
was doing so with the intent to monopolize, and that if not
stopped the Courier-Express would fail:

There are only two newspapers now. If the plan works as I nd it is intended to work,
there will be but one left.31

Bu ett appears in the judge’s rather awestruck opinion as an
impressive but archetypal nancier—supremely shrewd but darkly
enhanced. Page for page, Bu ett can barely take a breath without
its reeking of motive. Judge Brieant, unaware that Bu ett made a
habit of buying businesses on the numbers, views even his failure
to visit the newspaper plant or to talk to the employees as
“evidence of speci c intent to monopolize.” Even the judge’s
subtitle, Mr. Bu ett Comes to Bu alo, has a loaded ring. The judge
elegantly acknowledges, “Intent exists only in the unfathomable
human mind.” But he has no problem discerning intent from
Bu ett’s footprints:
Mr. Bu ett made no secret of his economic motivations and his acute awareness of the

value which would be attached to ownership of the Evening News were it to become a
monopoly. But for the awareness of this likelihood, it seems the acquisition of the
Evening News for this price, all in cash, and in this manner, makes no economic
sensed.32

The injunction permitted the Sunday paper to go ahead, but
severely restricted its ability to promote, market, and circulate the
edition to readers and advertisers. While these half measures hurt,
Judge Brieant’s strongly worded opinion did the real damage,
costing the Evening News dearly in public support, and at a crucial
time. The verdict was splashed all over the Courier-Express, along
with an approving photograph of the judge and a urry of
favorable stories and testimonials. The president of the local AFLCIO Council, representing 122,000 Bu alonians, was quoted on the
front page as saying: “Don’t buy that Sunday newspaper.” Just to
make sure that no one forgot whom it was ghting, the CourierExpress slapped a new nameplate on the front page: “Bu alo
Family Owned and Operated.”
On the eve of the new edition, Bu ett showed up at the Evening
News for a bash in the newsroom, accompanied by a blue-jeaned

Susie. He pressed a button, and the presses rolled. But sales had
been measurably slowed by the bad publicity. Readers and
advertisers, fearing the loss of jobs if the Courier-Express went
under, were rallying to the weaker paper. Most painfully,
employees at the Evening News could not respond to the bad press,
as they were legally enjoined from making defamatory remarks
about the Courier-Express. By December 18—the fth Sunday of
publication—the Evening News had only 147 inches of ads, as
compared to 579 for the Courier-Express, despite having 40 percent
more news space.33 In short, Bu ett’s newspaper had su ered a
crushing setback. To put it in perspective, Berkshire Hathaway’s
share price, which had rebounded in 1977, was trading at 132 a
share, so Bu ett’s net worth was in the neighborhood of $70
million. About a fth of his personal fortune was sunk into the
Evening News.
Both papers plunged into an all-out, old-fashioned newspaper
war, which in Bu ett’s opinion only one of them was likely to
survive.34 The Courier-Express, sensing that the injunction had
bought it time, modernized in a hurry. Typesetting was automated,
equipment upgraded. Douglas Turner, the executive editor, said,
“They gave me things I’d been asking for for years: split pages,
outlook sections, bigger comics, a bigger magazine. I built up the
payroll by 25 percent.”
The news sta s combed the city like rival fth columns. Robert
McCarthy, a reporter for the Evening News, said, “You didn’t dare
show your face if the Courier beat you on a story. You stayed all
night to beat them.” One of the few things that Bu ett could
control was the size of the news hole, and he went at it full blast.
“We made a point of having more news than the other paper,”
Bu ett recalled. “If they had eight pages of sports, we were going
to have more. All the traditional ratios—I told ’em to hell with
it.”35
In the newsroom, people had a sense that this owner would be
di erent. As one veteran put it, “Warren seemed to take a real
interest.” He occasionally sent a note commending a story, and he
showed up at a sta picnic wearing, of all things, a T-shirt. The

reporters, a cynical bunch, loved his skepticism. Rather than
ponti cate on the redeeming value of capitalism, he tipped the
paper to a story on a topic that concerned him much more—
namely, how greedy and perhaps unethical he considered his
fellow tycoons to be.
The story concerned a secret encampment in Santa Rosa,
California, known as Bohemian Grove. Each summer, conservaüve
business types such as Merv Gri n, Gerald Ford, and Ray Kroc
ew out in corporate jets to meet in the redwoods and bewail the
fate of Western civilization. According to Lee Coppola, the Evening
News’s crack investigative reporter, “The angle Bu ett wanted was
to examine whether or not the businessmen were taking a tax
deduction for the jets. It was during the gas crisis. He thought it
was wrong.” Coppola, who wrote a page-one blowout, turned
down a job o er partly because of his high hopes for how the
paper would be run under Bu ett.
But in the nancially crucial battle for Sunday supremacy, the
paper continued to hurt. In 1978, the Courier-Express trounced the
Evening News by 100,000 papers every Sunday. As Bu alo fell into
a recession, the sight of laid-o factory workers enhanced people’s
fears that the Courier-Express would fold. “The community had
bought their line,” the editor Murray Light recalled. “I’d call
Warren on Wednesday or Thursday to tell him how many ads we
had for Sunday. And there were only a handful.”
Bu ett would frequently call Light—his eyes and ears in Bu alo
—at Light’s home, and pick his brain over how to jump-start the
Sunday paper. An hour was a short conversation. “He had
enormous interest in every facet of the Sunday product,” Light
said. Bu ett came to town and met the big advertisers and
retailers. He approved promotional series, contests—“We did
everything,” Bu ett recalled.
We had these special circulation teams. All week they would tell me, “We got 828
starts this week, 750 starts this week.” Then, on Friday night, I would get the draw for
Sunday and we’d be down to 412 or something.36

Bu ett’s instinct in such a jam was to turn to a Man Friday, a
Harry Bottle or a Ken Chace. The guy he wanted was in Omaha—
Stan Lipsey, his buddy and the publisher of the Omaha Sun. Lipsey,
though, had no desire to go to Bu alo.
“What about just going up there once a month doing whatever
you think needs done?” Bu ett asked.
Lipsey thought to himself, “What kind of a job description is
that?” Bu ett, reading his mind, added, “The place will just run
better if you’re there.”
Lipsey went to Bu alo. He spent a week there each month, in
theory as an assistant to the publisher, who was a holdover from
the previous owner.
But the Evening News remained badly hampered by the
injunction. Judge Brieant required the paper to show a signed
customer order authorizing each and every Sunday delivery. And
every word that was uttered by an Evening News salesman,
executive, or other employee was picked over by opposition
lawyers in the hope of nding a violation of the court order. One
time, the Evening News was found in contempt—a serious matter.
Mason, a lawyer for the other side, said, “Things didn’t go well for
the News. We had the ability to police their activities. We had
discovery, we had access to their records.” Essentially, the paper
was operating at the mercy of a federal judge.
In 1978, the Evening News lost $2.9 million pretax—easily
Bu ett’s biggest hit. Lipsey, who would regularly phone him from
Bu alo, was amazed at how upbeat Bu ett remained. “He’s put all
his money in. He’s got a Sunday section going to zip. He’s got an
antitrust action. He’d be encouraging. He’d say thanks for calling.”
Munger was another story. After the contempt citation, Munger
called Murray Light in a state of high agitation, with the
supposedly big news that Bu ett was planning to give a speech
someplace. “Talk to Warren,” Munger said excitedly. “You have
more in uence than I do. Get him to be more careful with some of
the things he’s saying.” Munger lived in mortal fear of another tollbridge comment. Bu ett shrugged it o .

But Munger saw that the paper was no longer in control of its
destiny. In Blue Chip’s annual letter, he even allowed the
possibility that the paper might not make it.
Litigation is notoriously time-consuming, ine cient, costly and unpredictable. The
ultimate security of the Bu alo Evening News remains in doubt, as it will for a very
extended period.37

In April 1979, two years after Blue Chip’s purchase, the U.S.
Court of Appeals in New York reversed the injunction and the
contempt citation and strongly rebuked Judge Brieant.
Taking rst the issue of intent, we nd simply no evidence that Mr. Bu ett acquired
the News with the idea of putting the Courier out of business as distinguished from

providing vigorous competition, including the invasion of what had been the
Courier’s exclusive Sunday market.… All that the record supports is a nding that Mr.

Bu ett intended to do as well as he could with the News and was not lying awake
thinking what the e ect of its competition on the Courier would be. This is what the
antitrust laws aim to promote, not to discourage.38

Legally, Bu ett was vindicated. But in practical terms, the suit
had served its purpose. Though the Evening News remained by far
the dominant paper during the week, the Courier-Express’s lead on
Sunday was holding fast at 100,000 papers. And two months after
the appellate reversal, the morning paper was sold to the
Minneapolis Star & Tribune Co., owned by the Cowles family of
Minneapolis. Now the Evening News faced a protracted war against
another, also deep-pocketed out-of-town owner. In 1979, the
Evening News lost a whopping $4.6 million. For the rst time,
Bu ett and Munger were losing serious money. Munger recalled, “I
went through the calculations personally—I gured out exactly
how much my share would cost me and exactly how much the
Munger family could a ord to lose.”
In 1980, Lipsey moved to Bu alo full-time. † Bu ett hadn’t asked
him to do it, but Lipsey knew that Bu ett, in his none too casual

way, wanted him there—badly. And Lipsey had gotten hooked on
the battle with the Courier-Express.
When Lipsey took charge of the Evening News, the paper faced a
new crisis with labor. Prior to Bu ett’s purchase, the paper’s
thirteen unions had played the company o against itself, resulting
in what Munger termed a “leapfrogging of bene ts.”39 Determined
to break this pattern, Bu ett and Munger sent a message,
presumably intended for the unions, in the Blue Chip report that
appeared early in 1980:
If any extended strike shuts down the Bu alo Evening News, it will probably be forced
to cease operations and liquidate.40

The teamsters decided to test them. Late in 1980, the delivery
truck drivers demanded new manning requirements and pay for
work even if not performed,41 hot-button issues that were really
about control. Bu ett turned them down. At the eleventh hour, a
Monday evening in December, Ray Hill, who represented the
Newspaper Guild, the largest union at the paper, was called from a
church meeting to come down to the paper and try to help avert a
strike. Hill knew Bu ett, and sensed that he wasn’t blu ng. He
advised the teamsters not to play poker with him. The teamsters’
representative was Martin Brogan, a former bar bouncer and a
ringleader in the only previous strike in the paper’s history.
Brogan gured that Bu ett wouldn’t risk a strike in the midst of
the battle with the Courier-Express. Someone called a mediator,
who showed up drunk. The talks lasted all night. Finally, the
mediator turned to Hill and said, “Look, Ray, they want to strike.”
At 6:00 A.M. Tuesday, the teamsters walked.
The Evening News started to put out a paper, with the help of
other unions, who crossed the picket line. Then the pickets sacked
a delivery truck, and the pressmen stopped work and pulled the
page plates.42 The paper shut down, and subscription calls lit up
the Courier-Express. The nightmare in Bu alo had hit bottom.
Bu ett, according to a close con dant, was sweating. He knew
that if the paper shut down for long, it would su er a ruinous loss

of market share.43 He had to reopen it soon or never. On the other
hand, if he gave in, twelve other unions would demand the same
deal.
Early Tuesday, he announced that if the paper didn’t publish he
couldn’t meet a payroll, and ordered the entire sta to leave.
What’s more, he said, if the drivers didn’t return for the allimportant Sunday edition, he would close the paper for good.
Richard Feather, the Evening News’s chief bargainer, hung up the
phone feeling certain that Bu ett meant it.
Brogan, who was under pressure from the other unions, was
sweating, too. Hill told him, “Marty, whatever you’re ghting for,
you’re taking everyone over the side.” Finally, Brogan blinked. The
teamsters accepted a face-saving concession, and the Evening News
was back on the streets by Thursday afternoon.
Hill said, “Warren, when this is over, I want our cooperation
recognized.”
“Ray, an empty sack doesn’t stand very tall.”
Hill took this to mean that if the paper recovered from the war
with the Courier-Express, his members would be rewarded. But the
balance of power had shifted in Bu ett’s favor. As Hill said,
“Things are never the same after a strike.”
Both papers were hurting badly from the recession, which had
hit Bu alo hard. And the war of Sundays dragged on. The Evening
News made some gains, but it did not close the gap. After ve
years, it trailed in circulation, 195,000 to 265,000.44 And it
continued to lose money, though at a diminished rate. Since Bu ett
had bought the paper, pretax losses had amounted to $12
million.45 Early in 1982, Munger concluded that they had dug a
hole from which they would never recover.
We would now have about $70 million in value of other assets, earning over $10
million per year, in place of the Bu alo Evening News and its current red ink. No

matter what happens in the future in Bu alo we are about 100% sure to have an
economic place lower than we would have occupied if we had not made our
purchase.46

In the next few months, Sunday circulation crept over 200,000,
though it remained far below the Courier-Express. Meanwhile,
Bu alo was rife with rumors that one or the other paper would
fold. Bu ett vehemently denied that he would even consider it.47
But the city could not support two papers. The question, again,
was who would blink rst. And then, in September, the CourierExpress did; it folded.
The morning paper had been losing $3 million a year, twice as
much as the Evening News. Otto Silha, chairman of the Courier’s
parent Minneapolis Star & Tribune Co., said the decisive factor
was that its agship Minneapolis paper also was doing badly. In
contrast, he knew that Blue Chip could be sustained inde nitely by
the increasingly lucrative See’s Candy.
The day the Courier-Express died, the Evening News changed its
name to the Bu alo News and started a morning edition. Within six
months, Sunday circulation topped 360,000—far surpassing the
peak Sunday readership of its rival. Ad rates, re ecting the
surviving paper’s higher readership—and its monopoly—surged.
The paper became a gold mine, or perhaps even a toll bridge. It
was soon clear that Munger had been wrong; the paper would be
not merely pro table, but immensely so.
The News earned $19 million, pretax, in its rst year without
competition. (Those pro ts belonged to Berkshire Hathaway,
which fully absorbed Blue Chip Stamps in a merger.) By the late
eighties, the News would earn more than $40 million a year—more
than Bu ett had invested in Berkshire and Blue Chip combined. His
ascent up the investment food chain had a certain inexorable
momentum: stamps provided the cash for See’s Candy; the pro ts
from candy fueled the Bu alo Evening News, and the News could
bankroll an even bigger prize still.
Bu ett disabused the employees of any illusions over who would
share in that prize. Soon after the Courier’s demise, Bu ett
attended a meeting for the newspaper’s middle-level managers, in
Bu alo’s Statler Hotel. “What about pro t-sharing for people in the
newsroom?” Bu ett was asked. On its face, this seemed
reasonable. The newsroom had certainly done its bit.

Bu ett replied coldly, “There is nothing anybody on the third
oor [the newsroom] can do that a ects pro ts.” The sta was
shocked, though Bu ett was merely living up to his brutal-butprincipled capitalist credo. The owners of the Bu alo Evening News
had run very great risks. Employees had not come forward during
the dark years to share in the losses. Nor, now, would they share in
the gains.
Alvin Greene, a night editor who was present at the meeting,
said, “I was just stunned. It sort of sent a message to everyone in
the newsroom.”
Employees got a catch-up raise, but not the home run they had
hoped for. As Greene said, “The big disappointment was, we won
the battle. We got one fairly good raise and then nothing [out of
the ordinary].”
In the years after the Courier-Express folded, the pay scale at the
News slipped to thirtieth among Guild papers nationwide—down
from seventh when Bu ett had bought the paper.48 Still, Ray Hill,
the Guild unit chairman, judged that Bu ett had delivered on what
he promised. Had the roles been reversed, Hill said, he would not
have behaved much di erently.
As the sole survivor in Bu alo, the News faced a problem that
had been unthinkable during its war with the Courier. As Bu ett
noted in an annual letter to Berkshire, a monopoly newspaper has
no economic incentive to maintain its quality.
Owners, naturally, would like to believe that their wonderful pro tability is achieved
only because they unfailingly turn out a wonderful product. That comfortable theory
wilts before an uncomfortable fact.… Good or bad [a dominant paper] will prosper.49

Bu ett pledged to keep it a good paper anyway, and in a
statistical sense he kept his word. The News continued to publish
the same number of news columns as advertising, giving it the
highest news ratio of any comparable daily in the country.50
Bu ett also remained a close friend of Stan Lipsey’s. But he went
to the newspaper less often, and reporters stopped hearing that he
was reading their stories. Gradually, the sta came to feel a certain

disappointment. Bu ett was a decent owner, probably no tighter
than others. But the reporters had hoped that Bu ett would be
more—a larger presence if not a more muni cent one. And the
wartime spirit of the paper was lost.
Lee Coppola, the investigative sleuth who had been so motivated
by Bu ett, left the paper, went into broadcasting, and eventually
became an assistant U.S. prosecutor in Bu alo. He continued to
exchange an occasional note with Bu ett. His feelings—like those
of others who had invested Bu ett with expectations not of
Bu ett’s doing—were mixed. “The dream that I had was not
ful lled,” Coppola said. But, he added, “To this day, I respect the
man.”
A decade after its war with the Courier-Express, the News reached
three-fourths of the households in Bu alo—the highest such ratio of
any metropolitan paper in the country.51 But Bu alo was the
poorer for having one newspaper instead of two, and total
newspaper readership in the city was much less than when the
Courier-Express had been alive.52
Certainly, Bu ett had every right, and also every reason, to start
a Sunday paper. And given what has occurred in other cities, there
was little chance that two papers could have survived even had
Bu ett not come to town. In e ect, he had merely given the
Invisible Hand a push. Still, a paper had been buried and jobs had
been lost. And in some remove of “the unfathomable human
mind,” Bu ett must have suspected, even in court, that it would
turn out that way. Consider his words to a colleague on the
survival prospects of second newspapers:
In years past, hundreds of newspaper owners, putting up their own money, as well, I

am sure, as most of the “experts”, felt that large cities would sustain more than one
healthy newspaper. It just wasn’t so.53

Bu ett wrote that in 1972, ve years before the Evening News was
even a glimmer in his eye. He had known, all along, that second
papers were doomed. In Bu alo, he merely proved it.

On the shores of Lake Erie, memories of the war died hard. Long
after the event, veterans of the Courier-Express were bitter about
the paper’s demise. Even their children harbored a resentment
against Bu ett’s paper, but they subscribed to it seven days a
week, just as did the children of the victors. As Daniel Mason,
Furth’s associate and later his partner, muttered, “At the end of the
day, Bu ett got his monopoly.”
* At the time, Blue Chip had more free cash than Berkshire did. Blue Chip was already
controlled by Berkshire, and it would soon become a majority-controlled subsidiary of it.

† Bu ett sold the Sun, the chain of Omaha weeklies of which Lipsey had been publisher.
Subsequently, Bu ett went on the board of his hometown daily, the Omaha World-Herald.

Chapter 12

PARTNERS, REDUX

As Bu ett was jetting o to New York or Washington or Bu alo, he
and his wife were leading increasingly separate lives. Susie was
getting serious about her singing. Neil Sedaka heard her in Omaha
and suggested that she turn professional, and Susie was game to do
it.1 Bill Ruane, Warren’s investment manager friend, arranged for
her to audition at Manhattan nightclubs, including Tramps and the
Ballroom. The Bu etts’ New York friends discovered that she could
sing. According to Roxanne Brandt, who was also a singer, “If you
had walked in o the street you wouldn’t have said this was a rich
guy’s wife.”
Invited back to New York for a return engagement, Susie began
to talk about polishing her act and going on extended tour. She
even signed up with William Morris, the talent agency.2
In the spring of 1977, as Bu ett was purchasing the Bu alo
Evening News, Susie was doing another stint at the French Café, in
Omaha. On occasion, after the show, the sta would go to the
Bu etts’ for a nightcap. Warren would join them for a few minutes
and then disappear to his study, leaving Susie to play hostess.3 “I
have a picture of Mom and the French Café people coming over,”

Peter said. “Dad was like the dad. He was upstairs reading. Mom
and her friends were like the kids.”
The Bu etts’ schedules were so divergent that, when they
celebrated their silver anniversary, in April 1977, Stan Lipsey had
a cartoonist draw a wry card depicting the two of them whirling
past each other on the top of a wedding cake.
While they had always had di erent interests, as the house
emptied of children Susie was more aware of a sense of missing
something. Kent Bellows, an artist friend who was hanging around
the house, thought Warren and Susie had “a great marriage”; they
were a case of opposites attracting. Yet so much of the time,
Warren seemed to be in a shell—present physically, but not much
more. He would be enveloped in a volume of Standard & Poor’s or
preoccupied with his thoughts.4 In an emotive sense, he was,
indeed, Susie’s opposite. Susie said to Bellows, “All Warren needs
to be happy is a book and a sixty-watt bulb.”
Susie, of course, wanted more, much more. She was so giving, so
wrapped up in emotional involvements. It was her nature to live
for others, which she had done for Warren more than for anyone.
Their daughter said, “Mom spent a lot of time supporting Dad so
he could do his thing. Dad was so intent, so focused. He just did the
same thing all the time.” Peter, more pointedly, said, “Mom
su ered for living for other people.” Susie’s time was late at night,
when she would stay up alone, listening to music.5
In a rare public interview, when the Omaha World-Herald was
writing up her stage career, Susie spoke appreciatively of Warren’s
support for her singing. Yet her description of him—the story was
published two days shy of their twenty- fth anniversary—was
restrained. Recounting the story of their courtship, she noted that
she had been “madly in love with somebody else,” but had
followed her father’s advice and discovered that Bu ett was “just
an extraordinary person.”6 She said nothing about being mad for
him. Nor did she mention that she still had wistful memories of her
romance with Milton Brown, and that, a quarter century later, she
still ruminated aloud, now and then, on what her life would have

been like had she married Brown instead of Bu ett. (Brown had
become a successful food broker in Des Moines.)
By then, the Bu etts were alone. Their daughter was married
and working for Century 21, in Irvine, California, near the state
university where she had attended college. Howie, meanwhile, had
dropped out of Augustana College, in Sioux Falls, South Dakota. He
was launching his own business, Bu ett Excavating, near Omaha,
and had cashed in his Berkshire stock to purchase earthmoving
equipment. Young Peter had enrolled at Stanford.
In September 1977, the elder Susie did a one-night performance
at the Orpheum, an ornate former vaudeville house in Omaha that
had been host in the 1930s to Al Jolson and Barbara Stanwyck. On
this particular evening, facing a hometown crowd, Susie was at her
slinky, sensuous torch-singer best. She cooed, “Let’s feel like we’re
in love, okay?”7
A short time later, forty- ve-year-old Susie walked out on her
husband. That is, she moved out of the Bu etts’ home on Farnam
Street, left Omaha, and rented an apartment in San Francisco. She
told her children (Howie was stunned, Peter almost expected it)
that she was not “separating,” legally or in other respects, from
Warren. But day to day, she wanted to live on her own.
To Bu ett, this was an immeasurable blow: stunning,
devastating, irreparable. It undid the nely spun cocoon that had
sheltered him from whatever was unpleasant, or distracting, and
had given him the comfort to pursue his work. It emptied his home
of gaiety and warmth, and of Susie’s soul-penetrating closeness.
There was no one who could remotely take her place. He told his
older sister, “Susie was the sun and the rain in my garden for
twenty- ve years.”
Left to himself, Bu ett was mysti ed about why she had left and
miserably lonely. He burst into tears on the telephone with her.
Susie, soothingly, explained her move as an evolutionary
adjustment—not a total break. They still could talk on the phone,
travel together, even share regular vacations in New York and
Laguna Beach. She talked and talked to him. They were still

husband and wife, she assured him. But the gist of it was, “We both
have needs.”8
Warren’s daughter came home to spend a couple of weeks with
him. Young Susie had Warren’s sunny, matter-of-fact temperament,
and she adored her dad. Coincidentally, she was in the process of
ending her own, short-lived marriage. She lled out his suddenly
empty house and helped him through domestic issues such as
eating something other than popcorn and having clean clothes.
Bu ett, who was nuts about “little Susie,” expressed amazement
that she could get the laundry done in a single afternoon. He didn’t
say much about Susie’s mother. Young Susie recalled:
He has a hard time verbalizing feelings. I only remember him sitting in his chair and
reading, talking about the laundry. At some point, I said, “Really nothing has changed.
If you had a tape playing of Mother opening and closing the door and yelling, ‘I’m
home,’ you’d think she was here.”

Among the Bu etts’ family and friends, who had tended to
idealize the Bu ett household, there was a sense of shock, and also
sadness. But Warren and his wife were not, in the ordinary sense,
broken. Though Susie was in California, they talked to each other
virtually every day.9 At Christmas, they reunited with their kids at
the beach house in Laguna. In the spring, Warren and Susie took
their usual two-week trip to New York.
Things got easier, his daughter said, as Bu ett came to realize
that his life was not so very di erent. Implicitly, it was the
prospect of change that terri ed him. He considered moving to
Southern California, nearer to much of his family, but couldn’t
bring himself to do it, partly because it would mean working
without his bland but faithful longtime secretary, Gladys Kaiser.10
In a larger sense, he was loathe to change his routine, leave the
familiar, or reinvent himself in any way.
Susie, on the other hand, was living in a modest, almost studentlike apartment, out tted with girlish accouterments such as a
Mickey Mouse telephone. She had the exultant sense of freedom
that comes with living alone, especially to someone who has had to

delay it until middle age. There were aspects of Susie’s personal
life that she did not share with Warren, and that Warren preferred
not to confront. People in the family knew, and understood that
Susie, too, had needs. They formed a kind of protective conspiracy
around him—the better for him to do his life’s work—as, indeed,
they always had. As Roberta, his younger sister, noted, “We are
very protective to Warren. I don’t know how it started, but it was
that way even growing up.”
Susie sheltered Warren more than anyone. She still cared for
him, and in her own way, she was as good at weaving a web
around people as her husband. Susie even suggested to several
women in Omaha that they call Warren for a movie, or maybe x
him dinner.11 One of those women was Astrid Menks, a blond, softspoken thirty-one-year-old waitress at the French Café. Astrid xed
Bu ett a couple of homemade soups and began to look in on him.
Susie gave them a push.12
If anyone in Omaha moved in di erent circles than Bu ett did, it
was Astrid Menks. She lived in a loft in the market district, an arty
neighborhood perpetually in transition from head shops to
cappuccino bars. Born in Latvia, she had come to Omaha as a girl.
She had lost her mother when she was young, and her father, a
waiter, had entrusted his children to an orphanage.13 The most
common description of Astrid was “survivor.” Witty and streetsmart, she was an habitué of antique stores and thrift shops and
inevitably managed to look striking even in secondhand threads.
She had a small frame and a sharply lined face that hinted at her
origins. In the winter, she would pick her way through the mounds
of snow and swirling Omaha winds, bundled up in an afghan and
a fur coat and leading a reddish dog and looking like a character
from Doctor Zhivago.14
Astrid seemed to know everyone in what passed for bohemian
society in Omaha. Tom Rogers, a nephew of Bu ett’s who lived
above the French Café, recalled, “When there was a blizzard and
people were snowed in—Omahans are sort of spiritual about snow
—Astrid would get together with the chef at V Mertz and organize
a big dinner for everyone.” She liked to make herself useful, but

behind the scenes. When Susie sang at the French Café, Astrid had
brought her tea between the sets. She had a cool artentiveness, and
modesty was second nature to her.
Within a year of Susie’s moving out of Bu ett’s home, Astrid
moved into it. Warren’s new arrangement ba ed his son Howie. It
ba ed everyone. Kent Bellows, the artist, who knew Astrid as a
thrift-shop end, was astonished that she had hooked up with the
richest guy in town. Bellows very brassily asked her, “So what is
this with you and Warren? Do you?”
There was talk that Bu ett had hired her as a “cook,” but in fact,
they were a couple from the start.15 Temperamentally, Astrid and
Bu ett suited each other. They had a kidding, easy way together.
While Bu ett was looking for bargain stocks, Astrid would stalk the
junk stores, or scavenge the supermarkets looking for bargains on
the millionaire’s Pepsi-Cola. When Bu ett was in his study, Astrid
would be in the garden. She liked being at home, and she freed him
from having to think about the practical details of living. If Peter
came in on a late-night train, Astrid would meet him.
Perhaps because she had lived alone so much, Astrid had a way
of catering to Bu ett without seeming subservient or losing her
grace. She stood up to him, but in a light, understated way. Of
course, the trade-o was rather strange. Astrid had security and
companionship. Bu ett had a partner to come home to, or to share
a steak with. Yet from the day she moved in, Astrid knew that
Bu ett did not envision remarrying, and that he was still attached
to his wife. She made a home for him, yet she would see him o
with neatly laundered shirts when he left town to be with Susie.16
At rst, Astrid would leave Omaha rather than stay in the empty
house.17 After a while, she got comfortable with his comings and
goings, and with people in Bu ett’s family. Remarkably, she also
got to be chummy with Warren’s wife. When Susie came to Omaha,
she and Astrid did lunch, though Susie did not stay at Farnam
Street. At an annual meeting of Berkshire Hathaway, the two
women sat side by side, making small talk while their common
friend presided onstage.

This mostly unlikely trio developed a rhythm. Astrid took care of
Bu ett day to day; Susie was with him if Bu ett was accompanied
outside of Omaha. In New York and California, Warren and Susie
saw their usual friends. Also, at any formal occasion, such as the
biannual meetings of Bu ett’s Ben Graham investors group, Bu ett
brought his wife.
To outward appearances, Warren and Susie’s personal chemistry
was unchanged. Joe Rosen eld, the Iowa retailer who often joined
them in California, said they “acted like a regular married couple.”
The younger Susie said her parents’ “basic relationship” was the
same. Peter thought it “surreal”—the fact that they lived fteen
hundred miles apart seemed to have changed nothing.
Bu ett even got a kidding tribute from Howard Newman (the
son of Ben Graham’s partner) for having two women. “Ben wanted
to do that, but you pulled it o ,” Newman joshed. Yet Bu ett was
hardly the romantic Casanova that such a comment suggests. He
alternated between his female leads in a methodical,
compartmentalized fashion, almost as though it were scripted. In
fact, Astrid and Susie were di erent people, not actresses and not
really interchangeable. It was all very jarring to Bu ett’s friends,
and though they became accustomed to his domestic triangle, they
still found it inexplicable.
One wonders to what extent Bu ett himself was willing to
explore his marriage (Peter, for instance, questioned whether his
mother had been talked into marrying his father from the start, a
notion Bu ett disputed), or whether he simply rearranged his
supporting cast so as to best continue working. But however much
it perplexed his friends, the fact is that Bu ett found, or contrived,
a solution that worked for him. Hanging on to Susie, even at a
distance, gave him the continuity he had always craved, even as a
boy when he had run back to Omaha. It spared him the trauma of
divorce, or of a hateful search for new frontiers.
This deliberateness was characteristic of him. “I really like my
life. I’ve arranged my life so that I can do what I want,” he once
observed to a reporter. Typically, he was not concerned with
appearances, even now, when outing the deepest of social

conventions. He did not try to explain his ballet à trois; in his one
published comment, he merely noted that it suited the three people
directly involved: “If you knew everybody well, you’d understand
it quite well.”18
Bu ett did make a point of telling friends that Astrid had Susie’s
blessing. Don Danly, Bu ett’s old pinball partner, visited him in
Omaha after Astrid had moved in, and naturally wondered about
her. Danly could hardly help but notice that she and Bu ett went
o at night. Bu ett told him that the two women were friends.
Danly said, “I think it was important to him. He was telling me he
wasn’t doing anything underhanded.”
In Peter’s view, Bu ett’s rst years without Susie were a gray
time. “For a while he was empty and sad,” Peter said. An intimate
woman friend thought Bu ett “achingly lonely.” But to her, the
interesting thing was how he coped with it. No one outside a small
circle had any glimpse of that grayness. According to his son,
Bu ett himself did not always see it. He focused on his work, and
he “tap-danced” through his new, carefully plotted life as though
he had “blinders.”
In a previous crisis, when as a boy he had been marooned in
Washington, Bu ett had thrown himself into delivering
newspapers. Though he was an owner of some of those papers
now, not much else about his work had changed. He couldn’t rise
early enough, as though a bundle of papers still awaited him at the
o ce. Nourished, now, by two supportive women, he would
unfailingly answer the telephone with a verbal high- ve, as if he
had never known an unhappy moment. Joe Rosen eld, an old and
dear friend, never saw Bu ett despondent—not once. “He’s so
wrapped up in Berkshire,” Rosen eld noted.
Far from slacking o amid his personal troubles, Bu ett
experienced a creative resurgence. In the late seventies, and with
his usual unpredictable timing, Bu ett (on behalf of Berkshire)
made a staccato burst of investments. Energized, as always, by a
depressed stock market, he began to shovel the oat from
Berkshire’s insurance company into stocks, including Amerada
Hess, American Broadcasting Cos., more GEICO and then still

more, General Foods, Knight-Ridder Newspapers, Media General,
SAFECO, F. W. Woolworth, and then again still more.
It was said that the rumor that Bu ett was buying was enough to
boost a stock by 10 percent. General Foods “went winging up,”
according to the broker Art Rowsell. “Warren wouldn’t
acknowledge that he was buying it. He kind of waited everybody
out, and it came back down, and he started buying it again.
Charlie [Munger]—he was ranting: ‘The sonuvabitches are
following us again.’ ”*
As Bu ett was investing, he also began to write, occasionally for
business magazines, but primarily in the Berkshire Hathaway
annual reports. He had always had an urge to chronicle his
progress, but his pen had been strangely silent since the days of
Bu ett Partnership. Now, increasingly, he used the letters to sketch
lucid business primers that ranged over investing, management,
and nance.
There was no single beginning, though when Bu ett later bound
a collection for reprint, he began with the 1977 letter, written
early in 1978, which coincided with Susie’s leaving home. This
letter was a primer of the most basic sort, and it is doubtful that
too many people read it. Bu ett explained that he evaluated stocks
exactly as he would an entire business: he looked for companies he
understood, run by honest and competent managers, with
favorable long-term prospects, and available at a decent price. He
made no attempt to anticipate the short-term price action.
The inspiration for this missive—and for Bu ett’s buying spree—
was the strange world of Wall Street of the late 1970s. Stocks of
the type that Bu ett described were there for the picking, yet once
again, nobody wanted them. By the summer of 1979, the Dow had
crashed to the mid-800s—remarkably, below its level of 1969. As in
the mid-seventies, the country was in a funk in matters economic,
and the headlines spoke of despair. The dollar had been routed by
the mark and the yen; there were fundamentalists in Iran, Reds in
Nicaragua, a revivi ed OPEC, energy shortages at home, and a
pervasive sense of the country in decline. Instead of the duplicitous
Nixon as President, America now had the virtuous but sorely

ine ective Jimmy Carter. His eye on the White House, George Bush
expressed shock at the level of federal debt. He promised, if
elected, to balance the budget in his rst term.19
It comforted no one that Wall Street had survived a similar brush
with Armageddon only ve years before—or that the earlier slump
had been followed by one of the greatest rallies ever. Financial
cycles are apparent only in retrospect. As it unfolds, each swing of
the market, cloaked in the vestments of the moment, appears
unique. The peculiar curse of the late seventies was in ation,
which hit an all-time high of 13 percent. On Wall Street, the prime
rate was in double digits. In the hinterlands, there was a new
species of snake-oil salesman—the doomsday pro teer. He peddled
gold, diamonds, art, real estate, rare metals, freeze-dried foods,
jojoba beans, and advice on surviving the next depression. His
message was: “Get out of paper.”
The poor soul who dared protest that stocks represented the
country’s earning power was greeted with a snicker. In a letter
dated 1979, Bu ett noted with astonishment that pension fund
managers, “a group that logically should maintain the longest of
investment perspectives,” had put only 9 percent of their available
funds into stocks that year—a record for cowardice.20 He could
hardly help but add, “We confess considerable optimism” regarding
Berkshire’s portfolio.21
Few disputed that stocks were cheap. But as in bear markets
past, fund managers were waiting until the outlook was “clear.”
Manufacturers Hanover had 60 percent of its funds out of the
market. Victor Melone, a senior investment o cer, explained,
“There are further questions to be answered.”22 Heinz H. Biel, vice
president of Janney Montgomery Scott, joined the chorus:
Knowing that stocks are cheap does not impel one to go on a buying spree; the future
is clouded by many ugly questions.23

The pinnacle of worry-wart prognostication was claimed by
Business Week, which in August 1979 ran a celebrated cover: “The
Death of Equities.” It was a seminal piece—a carefully wrought

obituary for the stock market. Henceforth, according to Business
Week, people would invest in money markets, fast-food franchises,
or rare stamps. Stocks, apparently, were history. That shares were
cheap was a “disincentive”—proof that the market was not merely
down but dead.
For better or for worse, then, the U.S. economy probably has to regard the death of
equities as a near-permanent condition—reversible some day, but not soon.24

Bu ett could not have disagreed more. The same week, he
penned an essay for Forbes, attacking the herd instincts of pensionfund managers and their age-old rationalization.
The future is never clear; you pay a very high price in the stock market for a cheery
consensus. Uncertainty actually is the friend of the buyer of long-term values.25

The Forbes essay re ected Bu ett’s reawakened urge to decipher
business in print, and on a deeper level than he had in the sixties.
He noted that pension-fund managers had ocked to corporate
bonds, then paying 9½ percent. Their reasoning was simple: stocks
had no coupons at all, and were considered more risky, especially
in light of the market’s recent performance.
To Bu ett, there was less to this distinction than met the eye. In
fact, stocks, then, were less risky, not more so. The origin of this
singular insight was that Bu ett looked beneath the form of a
security to its economic substance. A stock, like a bond, was a
claim on a corporate asset. A stock also bore a “coupon,” at least
implicitly—the underlying corporate earnings.
The companies in the Dow Jones Industrial Average, for
instance, earned 13 percent on book value, a gure that for the
group had held pretty constant. And those stocks were trading at
less than book. When he shut his eyes, Bu ett could see the stocks
in the Dow as a “Dow Bond” with a “coupon” of 13 percent—
clearly superior to the return on bonds. And for the patient
investor, stock prices would eventually re ect the buried 13
percent.

Bu ett’s own stock had risen despite the bear market. Berkshire
was now at $290 a share, giving Bu ett a paper fortune of $140
million. But the curious fact was that Bu ett, whose salary was
only $50,000, couldn’t live o his Berkshire. He refused to sell even
a single share of his precious “canvas.” Nor would he permit the
company to pay a dividend. To bleed it of capital would have been
sacrilege—shaving o a corner of his work-in-progress to pay the
rent.
Feeling the pressure of having to support two households, he
complained to Charles Heider, an Omaha broker, “Everything I got
is tied up in Berkshire. I’d like a few nickels outside.”
In the late seventies, he bought a few stocks for his own account.
He was a bit more of a swinger with his personal money. For
instance, in the case of Teledyne, Bu ett invested in options—a
strategy with a higher chance of either failing or making a
killing.26 According to one associate, he also bought copper futures
—an outright speculation.
“It was almost frightening, how easy it was,” a Berkshire
employee said. “He analyzed what he was looking for. All of a
sudden he had money.” When a friend suggested that Bu ett try his
hand in real estate, Bu ett grinned. “Why should I buy real estate
when the stock market is so easy?”27 According to the broker Art
Rowsell, “Warren made $3 million like bingo.”
Even with his now immense fortune, Bu ett continued to live
simply, at least in Omaha. He drove his own car, a Lincoln, to the
modest suite at Kiewit Plaza, where he and a sta of ve ran the
corporate a airs of Berkshire. His principal diversions were bridge,
reading business books, and watching sports and talk shows. When
he and Astrid went out, it was usually to Gorats, an
unprepossessing Omaha steakhouse, owned by a former gradeschool classmate of Bu ett’s.
Increasingly, though, Bu ett’s world—his friends, his companies,
his writing—extended beyond Omaha. His fortieth-birthday party
had been on a golf course in Omaha; for his ftieth, in the summer
of 1980, Susie threw a black-tie bash at the Metropolitan Club in
New York. Bu ett got a giant bag of popcorn from Stan Lipsey and

a succession of gags. Jerry Orans, his friend from Penn, was there,
and Don Danly, from high school, Walter Schloss, aide-de-camp at
Graham-Newman, Sandy Gottesman—he of the infamous tollbridge quote—Kay Graham, Carol Loomis, and Marshall Weinberg.
Bu ett brought a copy of the balance sheet from Wilson Coin Op,
his rst business. Susie, the torch singer, sang an ode to her man.
There were tributes from cronies, ending with a poignant toast
from Munger.
Underneath the partygoers’ merriment, there was probably no
one in the great, wood-paneled room who did not feel that Bu ett,
in some way, was to leave a mark. With his scu ed shoes, grownin but receding hair, and prominent beak, he looked more the
professor than ever. Still slender, he had the unruly eyebrows of a
thinker. Indeed, the revelers’ a ection was fused with an
excitement, even a certain idolatry. Whosoever owned stock in
Berkshire—now quoted at $375 a share—was getting rich.
The next year, Bu ett had a dangerous close call. The wife of Rick
Guerin, a money-manager chum of Bu ett’s and Charlie Munger’s,
died suddenly and tragically. Bu ett, who was in Omaha, called
Guerin at his home in California.
“I’m hurting,” Guerin said.
“I know how you feel,” Bu ett replied. “I felt the same way
when my father died, like someone beating me.”
After a pause, he added, “Look, why don’t you and your son get
on an airplane and we’ll meet up at Charlie’s island. We’ll just sit
around for three or four days.”28
Bu ett and the others met at Munger’s cabin, on a lake in
Minnesota. Munger took them shing in an outboard motorboat,
and as he was maneuvering in reverse, water rushed in over the
gunwale. Guerin warned him to slow down, whereupon the halfblind Munger obstinately turned up the throttle. In an instant, the
boat was underwater—and Bu ett was trapped beneath it. The
athletic Guerin managed to pull him out from under. Though they

all made light of it—Charlie’s new sobriquet was “Commodore
Munger”—Bu ett was visibly shaken by his near-drowning.
Guerin, though, was deeply touched by Bu ett’s willingness to
drop everything for him. “He has enormous compassion,” Guerin
said, “but people don’t see that. To me it was just an amazing gift
—the gift of time.”
On Wall Street, Bu ett’s letters had begun to circulate beyond
the clique of his Rick Guerin-like admirers. Bankers were
photocopying the reports and passing them around chain-letter
style. For the rst time, Bu ett had a bit of a public following. As
he wryly observed, Berkshire had “one-share subscribers” who
bought a single share just to get the report.
Munger said it was an accident that Bu ett was running a public
company—that he could have happily run a private portfolio from
Omaha. But this does not take account of Bu ett’s entertainer’s
calling. In his letters, he found his stage. He would seize on an
aspect of Berkshire—a wrinkle in its accounting, a problem in
insurance—and veer o into a topical essay. In that respect, the
letters were corporate oddities. One read the annual report of
General Motors to learn about General Motors, not about the
prejudices of any resident author-executive. The usual pose was
Protestant and sober—what one would have expected from a
Seabury Stanton. Bu ett’s were replete with sardonic observations
on sex, greed, human fallibility—and himself. The syllabus was
that of the Harvard Business School, but the spirit was Poor
Richard’s Almanac. And rather than explain business to just Kay
Graham, he could do so for Wall Street, and for people across
America.
Jack Byrne, who knew Bu ett, had the sensation as he read the
letters of the scales falling from his eyes. Richard Azar, a young
entrepreneur from Trinidad who did not know him, experienced an
epiphany: when he was nineteen, Azar wrote, “God sent a blessed
gift to me that came in the form of a Berkshire Hathaway Annual
Report.”29
One explanation is that these tours through American capitalism
and the exploits of Berkshire had no parallel. Tycoons there had

been, and also men of letters, but here, in one package, was a J. P.
Morgan writing with the irreverence of Will Rogers. Bu ett
leavened the essays with cracker-barrel witticisms and nimble
quotations (belying the notion that he was some sort of hick) from
cultural icons such as Pascal, Keynes, Mae West, and Yogi Berra.
But these were mere tru es. What set the essays apart was his
knack for unbuttoning a complex subject and clearly explaining it.
Through the early eighties one can discern three recurring
themes. One was Bu ett’s dread fear of in ation, inherited from
his father. He seemed to have taken to heart Lenin’s dictum that
the way to ruin capitalism was to ruin its money, and he doubted
that politicians had the willpower to slow the printing press. Thus,
Bu ett saw in ation—as it turned out, erroneously—as a
permanent a iction. “Like virginity, a stable price level seems
capable of maintenance, but not of restoration.”30 Indeed, he
feared that in ation might spell the demise of the long-term
bond.31 This proved to be dead wrong.
However, Bu ett’s insights enabled him (and more attentive
readers) to minimize in ation’s devastating consequences. His
appreciation of its e ect on the insurance business was especially
dynamic. In ation was destroying bond values, and the insurance
industry had most of its capital in bonds—which previously had
been the prudent course. What Bu ett grasped was the vicious toll
that the insurers’ investments exacted on their main business. As
bond losses mounted, Bu ett saw that insurers would be unwilling
to follow their usual course of selling assets to pay o claims,
because any company that unloaded bonds would have to admit to
a crushing loss of capital. Then again, he recognized, the money
that insurers had invested in bonds was not theirs to keep.
For the source of funds to purchase and hold those bonds is a pool of money derived
from policyholders and claimants (with changing faces)—money which, in e ect, is
temporarily on deposit with the insurer.32

The alternative method of raising cash was for insurers to write
more policies, which Bu ett judged would cause the industry to

write as much business as possible, driving premiums down to
unpro table levels and spurring huge losses in underwriting. All
this unfolded as writ. Berkshire itself had minimal exposure to
long-term bonds, the purchase of which, Bu ett noted, was
equivalent to “selling money” at a xed price for thirty years. In
an in ationary era, this was no less suicidal than agreeing to set a
price on Hathaway yarn for the year 2010.
Alas, understanding in ation did not provide immunity to it.
Bu ett pointed out, with no little agony, that when he had taken
over Berkshire the book value of one share could have bought one
half-ounce of gold and that, after fteen years in which he had
managed to raise the book value from $19.46 a share to $335.85, it
would still buy the same half-ounce.33
The best that he could do was to invest in companies that might
resist in ation’s ravages, such as General Foods and R. J. Reynolds
Industries. Bu ett gured that well-known consumer brands, such
as Post cereals and Winston cigarettes, would be able to raise
prices at a pace with in ation. He also bought hard-commodity
stocks, such as Aluminum Co. of America, Cleveland-Cli s Iron,
Handy & Harman, and Kaiser Aluminum & Chemical. But as Bu ett
would remind his readers, neither Berkshire nor anyone had a
“remedy” for the problem. In ation was a “gigantic corporate
tapeworm” that “preemptively consumes its requisite daily diet of
investment dollars regardless of the health of the host organism.”34
On Wall Street, in ation had triggered a frantic hunt for
corporate assets. Companies, like people, were desperate to
convert money to anything other than cash, igniting the takeover
mania of the early eighties. Venerable names, such as Del Monte,
National Airlines, Seven-Up, Studebaker, and Tropicana, were
being swallowed up at huge premiums. This spurred the
multimillionaire Bu ett to adopt the unlikely role of one of Wall
Street’s most scathing critics.
In his view, the vanity of corporate CEOs was leading to
irrational deals. CEOs were, by natural Darwinian selection,
excessively energetic sorts, seldom “de cient in animal spirits.”
They measured themselves by the size of their castle, rather than

by Bu ett’s yardstick of pro tability (which to him was the only
rational goal). Instead of buying small pieces of companies on the
cheap, as Bu ett did, these CEOs preferred to take full bites at
more than full prices. Not to worry, though—these CEOs, being by
the same Darwinian process an egocentric bunch, believed that
their talents would justify their paying such lofty prices:
Many managements apparently were overexposed in impressionable childhood years
to the story in which the imprisoned handsome prince is released from a toad’s body

by a kiss from a beautiful princess. Consequently, they are certain their managerial

kiss will do wonders for the pro tability of Company T(arget)…. We’ve observed
many kisses but very few miracles.35

Bu ett wrote that for the 1981 report, when the merger wave
was new. The next year, he could not resist a reprise. Many CEOs
were paying for acquisitions by issuing shares. Bu ett subjected
this seemingly innocent technique to a rather savage dissection. In
the rst place, he observed, the acquiring CEOs weren’t only
buying, they were also selling. With the issuance of new shares,
each ongoing stockholder wound up owning proportionately less
of the company than before. The CEOs disguised this fact by using
the language of a buyer: “Company A to Acquire Company B.”
However, “Clearer thinking about the matter would result if a
more awkward but more accurate description were used: ‘Part of A
sold to acquire B.’ …”36
Why was this disguise employed? Most stocks, including most
acquirers’ stocks, were cheap. In such a case, an acquiring CEO
was shopping with unattractive currency, like an American in
Paris when the dollar was undervalued. As he collected corporate
trinkets he was parting with his own company on the cheap.
Bu ett suggested that such managers and directors could
“sharpen their thinking” by asking if they would be willing to sell
all of their company on the same basis as they were selling part of
it. And if not, why were they selling part of it?

A cumulation of small managerial stupidities will produce a major stupidity—not a
major triumph. (Las Vegas has been built upon the wealth transfers that occur when
people engage in seemingly-small disadvantageous capital transactions.)37

What got under Bu ett’s skin was that CEOs were enlarging
their personal empires at the expense of shareholders—the very
group they were pledged to serve. Such managers “might better
consider a career in government.”38
Bu ett likened corporate kingpins to bureaucrats precisely
because he knew it would taunt them. In life, Bu ett was friendly
with many of those CEOs; he sat on their boards. In his letters, he
was careful not to name them. Still, he divorced himself from his
natural corporate allies. (On white-collar crime: “It has been far
safer to steal large sums with a pen than small sums with a
gun.”)39 There was a whi about him of Dust Bowl progressivism,
yet Bu ett was anything but a Prairie socialist. Where the latter
loathed businessmen as capitalists, Bu ett arrived at his critique
via the opposite route. He attacked CEOs for being wards of the
corporate state—that is, for being insu ciently capitalist and selfreliant.
This suggests Bu ett’s most pervasive theme, which was the
proper relationship between corporate managers and shareholders,
i.e., between the stewards of capital and its owners. In his view,
the mangers of other people’s money bore a heavy burden, which
he demonstrated in 1980, when a change in federal law forced
Berkshire to divest the Rockford bank into a separate company.
Bu ett calculated that the bank was worth 4 percent of Berkshire;
then he allowed each shareholder to choose between keeping his or
her proportional stake in Berkshire and in the bank, or to take
more of one and less of the other, depending on which slice (bank
or Berkshire) a holder might prefer. The only one who did not get a
choice was Bu ett; he would take whatever shares were left. The
principle was that he who cut the cake should be happy with the
last slice.
In the same spirit, in 1981, Bu ett introduced a novel corporate
charity plan, conceived by Charlie Munger. For each of its one

million shares, then trading at $470, Berkshire would contribute $2
to charities of that shareholder’s choice. Someone who owned one
hundred shares could designate the recipients for $200 in gifts, and
so on. At other public companies, the choice of charities came from
the CEO and the directors. (Only the money came from the
stockholders.) Bu ett saw this as sheer hypocrisy; not only did the
CEO give away his stockholders’ dough, he then got to play the big
shot at his alma mater, etc. Thus, “Many corporate managers
deplore governmental allocation of the taxpayer’s dollar but
embrace enthusiastically their own allocation of the shareholder’s
dollar.”40
By such words and deeds, Bu ett was shaping Berkshire into a
very personal vehicle. In e ect, he was re-creating it as a public
form of the Bu ett Partnership. Some of his two thousand or so
shareholders were in fact his ex-partners, though most were not.
But one purpose of his letters was to attract and knit together a
shareholder group who would behave like his partners—in other
words, who would stick with him.
The uniqueness of this approach is hard to overstate. At virtually
every public company in America, high share turnover is not only
the rule, it is devoutly encouraged by the executives. The typical
CEO thinks of his investors as a faceless and changeable mass—to
use Phil Fisher’s analogy, like the diners in a highway road stop. At
Berkshire, the turnover was extremely low, which—as was clear
from Bu ett’s letters—was how he wanted his “café” to operate:
“We much prefer owners who like our service and menu and who
return year after year.”41
Bu ett scribbled his 7,500-word letters on a yellow legal pad,
during family removes at Laguna Beach. He liked to imagine that
his sister Roberta had been overseas for a year, and that he was
writing to bring her up to date on the business.42 The letters were
edited by Carol Loomis, his friend at Fortune, but they were
Bu ett’s creations and in fact sounded much as he did in
conversation, full of homespun expressions and homilies.
The reports were printed on coarse matte paper and bore merely
the company name and a vertical black stripe on the cover. Inside,

there were no snapshots of chocolates at See’s Candy, no
photographs of Bu ett and Munger with the pensive gaze that
chief executives unfailingly employed for such occasions, no
pyrotechnics with graphics-just a mass of type.
In part, Bu ett was good at writing annual reports because he
was good at reading them. Such reports typically are slick public
relations documents, intended to put a gloss on management’s
performance and to attract new investors. Most contain only a
perfunctory message from the CEO, and even that is typically
ghostwritten. What Bu ett missed in the hundreds that he read
each year was a sense of the chief executive talking to him
personally, and without the intrusion of professional hand-holders.
Your Chairman has a rm belief that owners are entitled to hear directly from the CEO

as to what is going on and how he evaluates the business, currently and prospectively.
You would demand that in a private company; you should expect no less in a public
company.43

He was most unhappy with CEOs who resorted to that old Bu ett
bugaboo, changing the yardstick. When results disappointed, they
adopted “a more exible measurement system”: i.e., “shoot the
arrow of business performance into a blank canvas and then
carefully draw the bullseye around the implanted arrow.”44
His primers on accounting in particular had a moral tone. Given
that Wall Street cheers appearances, a CEO with the slightest
Pavlovian impulse will be tempted to dress up his company before
taking it out. The danger is that, having fooled the public, the CEO
will do likewise unto himself.45 Many run the business so as to
maximize not the economic reality but the reported results. “In the
long run,” Bu ett warned, “managements stressing accounting
appearance over economic substance usually achieve little of
either.”46
What should a CEO say to the public? In theory, he ought to
describe the business from the same perspective that its managers
did. Just as Bu ett expected Ken Chace to give him a candid

account of the textile mill, Bu ett owed a similar candor (though
not the same level of detail) to his public investors.
Berkshire’s reports, in fact, disclosed enough information for
readers to evaluate the company on the least favorable of terms.
As during the partnership, Bu ett repeatedly assured investors that
there was no chance of maintaining prior rates of success. He was
still the dutiful parishioner; confession soothed him. If there was a
aw in the reports, it was that Bu ett was occasionally cloying
and autoreferential. There was a winking quality to some of his
gags, as though he were looking over his own shoulder. Moreover,
his confessions of error and tongue-in-cheek self-immolations had a
falsely modest ring. His humility wasn’t going to fool anyone—not
with the stock in the stratosphere.
In 1982, that stock hit $750 a share. This gaudy number re ected
the gain in Berkshire’s stock portfolio, and that, in turn, was
taking wing from developments in Washington. Paul Volcker, the
Federal Reserve chairman, had been squeezing liquidity out of the
system. The rst e ect was a recession, the second, an ebbing of
in ation. By 1982, Volcker was su ciently con dent to loosen his
grip on interest rates. The White House, meanwhile, was a picture
of optimism. Ronald Reagan laughed o a would-be assassin and
pushed through a tax cut.
For so long, Wall Street had known nothing but fear. Now, as if
a cat-footed clerk in a basement of its stone fortresses had thrown
a master switch, brokers and bankers arrived at their desks with
con dence. In the summer of 1982, interest rates tumbled … and
tumbled … and tumbled. Treasury bills, quoted at 13.32 percent in
June, stood at 8.66 percent in August. Stock prices, at rst, resisted
this stimulus. In August, stocks fell for eight straight days. The Dow
stood at 777—well below its level of fteen years prior. The Dow
nally broke its losing string on Friday the 13th, gaining 11
points. Optimism was muted. On Monday, the Dow eked out a few
points more. Then, on Tuesday, at precisely 10:41 A.M., Henry
Kaufman, the perpetually gloomy Salomon Brothers economist
with the coveted crystal ball, did a volte-face. Kaufman—a.k.a. Dr.

Doom—declared that, counter to his previous sooth-sayings, he
now expected interest rates to continue falling. The news sparked
a buyers’ panic in stocks. The Dow rose 38.81 points—the biggest
one-day rise in its history. The next day’s Wall Street Journal
presciently reported: “Some are saying this is the start of the 1980s
boom.”47 The earth had moved.
By Labor Day, the market had risen 100 points more. By
October, yet another 100. In 1983, economic growth resumed, and
in ation retreated to a nostalgic 3 percent. The world discovered
that it had not too little oil, but too much. The surge in bonds
continued, driving long-term rates down to 11 percent, from 15
percent two years earlier. Meanwhile, the stock market
experienced a phenomenon unseen since the sixties—a sustainable
rally. New issues, out of favor since the Go-Go era, surged. Mutualfund sales, yet another ghost from the Wall Street closet, revived.
By May, the Dow was at 1,232, or 366 points higher than when
Business Week had prematurely buried it. The magazine now
proclaimed the rebirth of equities. As Bu ett had predicted, those
who had sat out the gloomy interval to wait for a “cheery
consensus” had paid a dear price indeed. They had missed a 42
percent move. “The news that Business Week had rediscovered the
stock market sent tremors of trepidation tripping through the
Street,” Alan Abelson of Banon’s jested wickedly. “Panic set in,
widows wept, orphans wailed and sell orders ooded the market
with a mighty rush.”48
Among the soaring stocks in Berkshire’s portfolio, Washington
Post, purchased at an average, split-adjusted price of 5 ,
skyrocketed to 73; A liated, acquired at 5, when no one else
would touch it, closed the year at 38. Interpublic, the ad agency,
was up from 6⅜ to 52. GEICO, bought in its darkest hour, had
multiplied ninefold. Time, purchased within the previous two
years, had doubled; RJR was up 17 percent; General Foods, 40
percent. Here and there, Bu ett did have losses. Berkshire dropped
$3 million on Vornado, a discount retailer, and lost money on
Sperry & Hutchinson, a green stamp purveyor, both purchased in
the 1970s. And Bu ett did not do well on some in ation-hedge

metal stocks. But in sum, where Berkshire once had not had any
portfolio, by the end of 1983 it had $1.3 billion worth of
marketable stocks. And it had all been assembled from the tiny
stream of cash that Bu ett had diverted from textiles.
Berkshire’s own stock was something to watch that year. It
opened for trading at 775. By spring, it was 15 points shy of 1,000.
On September 30, it was quoted at 1,245. This, as it happened,
was 12 points higher than the Dow. When Bu ett had taken it
over, Berkshire had been quoted at 18; the Dow, at 931, had been
fty times higher. Now they were neck and neck. The Dow nished
the year in game fashion, at 1,259, but by then, it was plainly
visible in the rearview mirror. Berkshire had risen to $1,310 a
share. Bu ett suddenly was worth $620 million. According to
Forbes, he was one of the richest Americans.
Shareholders pressed Bu ett to split his stock. The rationale—
and it is an article of faith at virtually every public company—is
that a lower share price is more a ordable and thus tends to
enhance the public’s interest in a stock. But in his 1983 letter,
Bu ett ruled out a split. Slicing the pie into more pieces would
hardly increase its value. (Try it with a pizza.)
To be sure, a split would attract new investors and stimulate
trading. It might even lift the price of Berkshire’s stock, at least for
a while. But this would merely reapportion one investor’s share of
the corporate wealth to another. If some traders exited at a higher
price, others would pay more to buy in. But as a group, Berkshire’s
owners would not be any richer, because the value of what they
owned, See’s Candy, the Bu alo News, and all the rest, would not
be a ected. “These expensive activities may decide who eats the
pie, but they don’t enlarge it.”49 Indeed, in the aggregate,
Berkshire’s owners would be poorer by the sum of increased
brokerage commissions. Brokers, themselves, praised high turnover
in the guise of “liquidity.” But, as Bu ett derisively added, such
trading merely helped the “croupier”; it in icted a “tax” on the
customer.
His attitude may seem extreme, but Bu ett wanted no false notes
that might con ict with his “ownership philosophy.” Most CEOs do

not have such a “philosophy,” nor is it a matter to which they give
much thought. But Bu ett had thought about it quite a bit. He was
consciously trying to assemble a tribe of like-minded shareholders,
who would focus, as he did, on long-term value. If people bought
for reasons that had nothing to do with value—such as a stock split
—so, too, would they one day sell. As much as possible, Bu ett
wanted to dissuade such in dels from becoming his partners. This
suggests the depth of Bu ett’s commitment to Berkshire; it was a
“job” to him in the sense that England was a job to Churchill.
In the same annual letter of 1983, Bu ett published a list of
“principles,” partly intended to attract and keep the investors he
wanted. There was nothing outwardly exceptional in these rules;
boiled down, they amounted to a pledge that he and Munger
would be straight with their investors and prudent with their
capital. The spirit that underlay them would have been familiar to
Oliver Chace, Bu ett’s nineteenth-century corporate progenitor.
But it was inconsistent with the spirit of Bu ett’s own, more
restless age. His aim was to pro t from the long-term growth of
(hopefully) well-chosen businesses, but not from nimbly entering
and exiting them, or from nancial legerdemain, or from various
forms of pie-splitting and (at foolish prices) pie-acquiring. In the
sense of abhorring change for its own sake, it was profoundly
conservative. Bu ett confessed a reluctance to go into debt or to
play investment musical chairs even at the certainty that his
attitude would penalize Berkshire’s return:
Regardless of price, we have no interest at all in selling any good businesses that

Berkshire owns, and are very reluctant to sell sub-par businesses as long as we expect
them to generate at least some cash and as long as we feel good about their managers
and labor relations. We hope not to repeat the capital-allocation mistakes that led us
into such sub-par businesses.… Nevertheless, gin rummy managerial behavior
(discard your least promising business at each turn) is not our style.50

In a calmer time, this would have been unremarkable. But the
1980s were no ordinary period in nance. America was home to
the hostile takeover, the junk bond, the leveraged buyout. The

archetypal business gure was no longer the rough-and-ready
entrepreneur, the Oliver Chace, but the sheer and dicer on Wall
Street. The mantra of this age was “liquidity”; not only corporate
shares, but whole companies, too, were ipped like trading cards
(indeed, ipped, and then dissected, and then reassembled and
repartitioned). The ethos of the age was transience; credit was its
catnip, instability its o spring. Supposing, for a moment, that
Chace could have returned to his once-prudent world, one may
imagine his horror. And yet, had he chanced to read some of his
company’s letters, might he not have felt, with astonishment anew,
that it was not all lost?
* Berkshire disclosed big investments at year-end.

Chapter 13

THE CARPET WOMAN

One question Bu ett always asked himself in appraising a business
is how comfortable he would feel having to compete against it,
assuming that he had ample capital, personnel, experience in the
same industry, and so forth.1
It was after such an appraisal that, in the summer of 1983, he
strode into the Nebraska Furniture Mart, a sprawling store
opposite Ross’s Steak House. He made his way through the acres of
convertible sofas and dining-room sets to the carpeting
department, and there, amid the vast eld of powder blues and
placid beiges, he spied the store’s owner, a woman all of four feet
ten inches, and slightly stooped at that. But as measured by
Bu ett’s yardstick, she might have been ten feet tall.
Rose Blumkin, known to Omaha as Mrs. B, was patrolling the
store in her golf cart. She motored down the aisle, haranguing an
employee and gesturing with her arms with the vigor of a woman
half her eighty-nine years. Her cheeks were ushed, and her
auburn hair, done up in a bou ant, showed gray only at the
temples. Bu ett reckoned that he would “rather wrestle grizzlies”
than compete against Mrs. B, and that was why he had come.

Speaking deliberately, Bu ett asked if she would like to sell the
store to Berkshire Hathaway.
Mrs. B said, “Yes.”
“How much?” Bu ett asked.
“Sixty million,” Mrs. B spat out.
They shook hands, and Bu ett drew up a one-page agreement—
Bu ett’s biggest acquisition by far. Mrs. B, who could not write in
English and barely could read it, made a mark at the bottom.
Merely a few days later, Bu ett presented her with a check for 90
percent (the Blumkin family kept a minority share). She folded it
without a glance and, by way of concluding matters, declared,
“Mr. Bu ett, we’re going to put our competitors through a meat
grinder.”2
So well did Mrs. B incarnate Bu ett’s business ideal, she seemed
to have sprung from the pages of his letters, as though he had
invented her to illustrate the plain virtues that he most admired.
Mrs. B had the toughness, determination, and common sense that
Bu ett had seen in his grocer grandfather, in the retailer Ben
Rosner, and in other Bu ett heroes. Her story was the familiar, and
distinctly American, story to which Bu ett thrilled. It was a
Horatio Alger script, set to the score of Fiddler on the Roof, yet
magni ed almost beyond belief.
Rose Gorelick was born on the eve of Hanukkah, 1893, in a
village near Minsk in czarist Russian.3 She and seven brothers and
sisters slept in one room, on straw. Her father was a rabbi, but his
piety was wasted on Rose, who observed that his prayers did not
provide the family with a mattress.4 She would awake in the
middle of the night to see her mother, who ran a grocery, slaving
over an oven baking bread. Hating to see her mother work so
hard, she helped her in the store from the age of six. Her other
formative experience was of the Cossacks, who now and then
would lay siege to the Jews in bloody pogroms.
The Gorelicks had no money for school (Rose never saw the
inside of a classroom), but she learned to read and do gures at the
home of a rich family. From her mother, she acquired a conviction
that begging was ignoble. At thirteen, she talked her way into a

job at a dry-goods store in Minsk. At sixteen, she was running the
store, a slip of a girl supervising ve men. She married Isadore
Blumkin in 1914 and saw him o to America, intending to follow.
But the war broke out before she could go. In the desperate winter
of 1917, with Europe a ame and Russia tottering, she boarded the
trans-Siberian railroad. At the Chinese frontier, a Russian guard
stopped her. Mrs. B, who did not have a passport, told him she was
buying leather for the army, and promised to bring him a bottle of
vodka on her return. Then she crossed Manchuria to Japan and
gained a berth on a peanut boat. Six weeks later she set foot in
Seattle.
In 1919, she and her husband settled in Omaha. Though
penniless, she sent for her parents and siblings, who moved in
under the same roof. Isadore ran a pawnshop and secondhandclothing store. To supplement this meager living, Mrs. B sold
furniture out of her basement. She spoke not a word of English, but
her kids, who picked it up at school, taught her.
In 1937, at the age of forty-four, she scratched together $500 and
rented a storefront, on Farnam Street, one block east of the
original Bu ett grocery. Thinking big, she dubbed it Nebraska
Furniture Mart. A photo from the time shows a determined face,
the black hair drawn in a bun, the jaw set rmly. Her method was
her motto: “Sell cheap and tell the truth.”
Brand-name manufacturers considered that her ultralow prices
were bad for business, and refused to supply her. But Mrs. B was
an adroit bootlegger. She would hop a train to Chicago or Kansas
City, where retailers such as Marshall Field would sell their excess
merchandise to her at a little above their cost.5 When she was out
of stock, she dragged the furniture out of her home. One time, one
of her grown daughters got a call from Mama. “Empty the baby’s
storage chest. I got a customer.”6
When she applied for credit, the banks would refuse her with a
snicker, out of which experience Mrs. B developed an enduring
hatred of “big shots.” What kept her going was her will. She
worked seven days a week, fty-two weeks a year, never a day o .
In addition, she found that she had an a nity for her working- and

middle-class customers, whom she referred to as “the vunderful
American people.” These loyal customers always came up with
cash when Mrs. B had bills.
In 1949, Mohawk Carpet Mills hauled her into court, accusing
her of violating fair-trade laws.7 Mohawk, a manufacturer, set a
minimum retail price on one of its carpets of $7.25 a yard. Mrs. B
was charging only $4.95. “So what’s wrong with that?” Case
dismissed. The next day, the judge walked into Nebraska Furniture
Mart and purchased $1,400 worth of carpet.
The next year, Mrs. B couldn’t pay her suppliers. A friendly
banker gave her a ninety-day $50,000 note. In a desperate bid to
stay a oat, she rented a hall, unloaded $250,000 of furniture in
three days, and vowed never to borrow again. And so, at age ftyseven, Mrs. B was on her way.
She was merciless with her sta , including those in her family.
“You worthless golem!” she would scream. “You dummy! You lazy!”
What saved her from herself was her gentleman son, Louie. Louie
was just as keen as his mother, but his manner was mild. When
Mrs. B ripped into a salesman, Louie would buck him up. Mrs. B
would re the help; Louie would hire them back. “Mama was very
tough,” Louie noted. “I liked to smear on the honey.” Isadore died,
but Louie stayed in the store. Whatever Mrs. B said, he would
answer with honey. “Mama, you know best.”
Mrs. B’s formula was irresistibly simple; she bought in volume,
kept expenses bone-trim, and passed on the savings. Typically, she
sold at 10 percent above her cost, but was known for making
exceptions. When a young couple came in, misty-eyed at the
prospect of their very own convertible, Mrs. B, who had
memorized the wholesale price of every item, would slash her price
on the spot. And that couple would come back.
The Mart became a rite of passage, the coda to weddings, births,
promotions. Omahans who had furnished homes at Mrs. B’s store
would return when they moved, or when their kids moved.
Advancing age didn’t slow her in the least. When a tornado took
her roof o , she kept selling. When a re scorched the store, she
handed out free televisions to the remen.8 Mrs. B never took a

vacation. “I never lied,” she said. “I never cheated. I never
promised I couldn’t do. That brought me luck.”
Susan Bu ett was friendly with the Blumkin family, and Warren
heard from her of the wondrous store that was furnishing half of
Omaha.9 Bu ett tried to buy it, early in his career, but Mrs. B
dismissed his o er as “too cheap.”10
But the rejection merely sti ened him. He kept a close eye on the
store and observed that Mrs. B was running one competitor after
another out of business. Driving around town with the writer Adam
Smith, in the early seventies, Bu ett pointed out the store and
reeled o
its operating statistics—the volume,
oor space,
turnover, and so on.
“Why don’t you buy it?” Smith wondered.
“It’s privately held.”
“Oh.”
“I might buy it anyway,” Bu ett added. “Someday.”11
When the day arrived, Louie and his three sons were running the
store. Mrs. B remained its chairman and full-time boss of the carpet
department. Bu ett, having heard that she was ready to sell, went
to see Louie rst—to sound him out on price and ensure that he
understood Mrs. B’s thickly accented English.12
Before the sale, Bu ett looked at the Furniture Mart’s tax
returns, which showed that it was earning about $15 million a year
pretax. He did none of the usual checking, such as asking for an
audit or examining the inventory, receivables, or property titles.
The average home buyer probably looks at more pieces of paper
than Bu ett did in spending $60 million. His approach seems
strange in a modern context, but it was in accord with the notion
of J. P. Morgan, Sr., that the principal judgments in business are
those concerning character. In Bu ett’s terms, if he couldn’t trust
the Blumkins, why become their partner?
One was tempted to ask, as so often with Bu ett, were things
really so simple? The answer is that he had a genius for keeping
them simple. In his 1982 letter, just before the deal with Mrs. B, he
printed a “Want Ad” describing his criteria for acquisitions. He
promised to respond to o ers quickly—“customarily within ve

minutes.” What Bu ett was saying was that he wouldn’t pursue a
close call. A business had to grab him by the throat—and this the
Blumkin business surely did.
The Mart was the biggest furniture store in the country, with
$100 million in annual sales. In Omaha, it accounted for an
astounding two-thirds of all furniture sales—a percentage that
leading stores in other markets did not come close to matching.13
Indeed, department store chains such as Dillard’s ($4 billion in
annual sales) refused to sell furniture in Omaha because Mrs. B
was too tough a competitor.14 As Bu ett might say, she had a toll
bridge to the living rooms of Omaha.
The Mart was so dominant that it ferried sofas out-of-state in
unmarked trucks so as to avoid angering merchants in other cities.
“If somebody else advertises Maytag washers she tears out their ad
and puts it on her Maytag washer,” Bu ett marveled. “It is hell to
compete with her.”15
Don Danly, Bu ett’s pinball partner, was in Omaha the day of
the purchase. After a ritual steak dinner, Bu ett took Danly
through the Furniture Mart, recounting the saga of “the amazing
Blumkins” in exquisite detail. Another visitor, Norman Lear, the
Hollywood producer, said, “Warren’s admiration for Mrs. B is like
a child’s. He talks about her the way a small boy would talk about
his grandmother.”
Since Bu ett had no wish to run a store himself, or even to
closely supervise one, he wanted managers who would “feel like I
do,” ready to tap-dance at the start of the workday.16 Mrs. B was a
sort of exaggerated version—almost a caricature—of that selfmade, self-motivating ideal. Bu ett, who had upped his own salary
to $100,000 a year, paid $300,000 to Mrs. B.17 He routinely
referred to her as one of his “heroes.”
He must have seen in her an unpolished—but in the essentials,
quite faithful—rendering of himself. It was not just her obsessive
habits (in her nineties, she continued to work every day of the
year, ten to twelve hours a day), or her native suspicion of credit
(the forty-three-acre store site was unmortgaged), or, as Bu ett put
it, that she “started with ve hundred bucks and put everyone else

out of business.”18 It was her utter singularity of purpose. When
the Omaha World-Herald inquired as to her favorite movie, Mrs. B
replied, “Too busy.” Her favorite cocktail? “None. Drinkers go
broke.” Her hobby, then? Driving around and spying on
competitors.19
A reporter who found Mrs. B at home noted that her living room
looked like an extension of the showroom. The twin love seats, the
re ecting glass co ee table, the assortment of crystal and brass
gurines were arranged as they were in the store. Price tags
dangled from the lampshades.20 Mrs. B didn’t spend much time
there and never entertained. “I don’t like rich society people,” she
noted. “Rich people are rude to you when you’re poor; I don’t
forget that.”
As an unlettered immigrant, she underscored all that Bu ett had
been writing about the folly of needless complexity. She knew
nothing about B-school retailing concepts such as “elasticity,” but
she could tell Bu ett her cash balance down to the penny.21 Bu ett
told an audience at Columbia Business School that Mrs. B knew
depreciation and accruals “better than anybody in this room,”
though she did not understand them in accounting terms. In his
view, she had a native genius, which consisted of staying focused
on the one area of her expertise.22 This was very similar to how
Bu ett saw himself. (At Bu ett’s prompting, New York University
granted Mrs. B an honorary doctorate of commercial science, an
honor she shared with Fed chairman Paul Volcker and Citicorp
CEO Walter Wriston.)
A visitor found her at work on a Sunday afternoon, attired in a
sweater and blue pinstriped suit, with a carpet sample in her
basket. She had a lively sense of humor and a poignant memory,
and vividly described the day that she had seen two of the czar’s
daughters in Minsk, shortly before they were shot.
When she spied a young woman ngering a rug, she burrowed
over to her like a motorized rat. An expression of alertness,
bordering on suspicion, was etched onto her face.
“Thirty-nine dollars. It’s a beauty.”
“I have blues and pinks,” the woman said uncertainly.

“It will go with anything.”
Mrs. B motored toward the counter. A saleswoman was on the
phone with a customer who hadn’t paid for a carpet.
“Hang up,” Mrs. B volunteered. “Let him go to hell. Got to be
ashamed of himself.”
The saleswoman was trying to work it out.
“Hang up! No sense talking to him.”
The saleswoman was straining to hear the details—something
about the wrong color.
“I make my life being honest. Say ‘Goodbye’ and hang up! The
guy’s going to get a cancer ’cause he’s such a crook.”
Aside from her prominent veins, she looked far less than her
nine decades plus. She subsisted on a diet of fruits and vegetables,
rose at 5:00 A.M., did not exercise, and, other than having had her
knees replaced, was in perfect health. That was probably the trait
Bu ett admired most.
He couldn’t bear the thought that ill health (or death) would
force him to give up working, and often joked that he planned to
rely on séances as a management tool. (Bu ett invariably vented
his most anxious feelings with humor.) For someone so conscious of
his mortality, the sight of Mrs. B must have provided a sort of
cover. Writing to his shareholders, Bu ett openly made the link
between Mrs. B’s advancing age and his own:
It’s clear to me that she’s gathering speed and may well reach her full potential in
another ve or ten years. Therefore, I’ve persuaded the Board to scrap our mandatory-

retirement-at-ioo policy. (And it’s about time: With every passing year, this policy has
seemed sillier to me.)23

Mrs. B’s blemish was her disposition, which was increasingly
brutal. She was badly at odds with two of her grandsons, who were
the store’s heir-apparent managers. One of them, Ronald Blumkin,
was so fed up with his grandmother’s scoldings that the two of
them had stopped speaking. This y in the Blumkin ointment was
easy—perhaps too easy—for Bu ett to ignore, because the Mart
consistently earned a high return.

Bu ett regarded the Blumkin clan so highly that Berkshire
bought a second family business: the Omaha jewelry store
Borsheim’s. Borsheim’s was truly a case of lightning striking twice.
In 1948, the then tiny store had been purchased by Mrs. B’s sister
and brother-in-law, Rebecca and Louis Friedman, who had escaped
Russia on a westward odyssey via Latvia. Borsheim’s became the
second-biggest-selling jewelry store (trailing only Ti any’s in New
York) in the United States.24 Like the Furniture Mart, it perfected
the high-volume/low-price formula—which, once in place, tends to
be self-perpetuating. Of course, the pro ts on diamonds were
considerably higher than those on carpets.
From Bu ett’s vantage, the stores had similar strengths. Each
enjoyed a protective “moat” that kept competitors at bay.25
(Bu ett’s hatred of competition, evident in the Bu alo newspaper
drama, was a mainstay in his career.) And nobody could take on
the Furniture Mart without a very substantial investment and
lengthy battle—which is the sort of chin-deep moat that dissuades
would-be competitors from even trying.
Indeed, it gave Bu ett a thrill just to stand by the counter at the
Furniture Mart and watch it ring up a sale.26 He made a ritual of
taking out-of-town guests to Mrs. B’s; he even provided buses for
the annual meeting of Berkshire, so his shareholders could visit the
store. In a spiritual sense, the Mart replaced the red-brick New
Bedford textile mill as the company’s agship. In fact, Bu ett made
about as much money in fteen months in furniture as he had in
nineteen years in textiles.
The comparison is illustrative, because the Hathaway mill was
everything the Mart was not. The mill was indistinguishable from its
competitors; the end consumer didn’t know it existed. As Bu ett
would bitterly joke, no one went into a men’s store and asked for
“a pinstriped suit with a Hathaway lining.”27
Whereas the fast turnover at Mrs. B’s resulted in precious little
capital being tied down in inventory, the textile mill consumed
capital. Every time one manufacturer upgraded its plant,
Berkshire’s mill and all the rest were forced to match it. Thus, no

one would gain any advantage—any moat—but every
manufacturer would have sunk in more capital.
Though Bu ett knew better, he occasionally had been seduced
into thinking that a little more capital could turn it around. In the
mid-seventies, he even bought another textile plant, in Manchester,
New Hampshire. On paper, the purchase was a steal. But it turned
out to be a disaster. Retrospectively, Bu ett realized that textiles
were a trap:
Viewed individually, each company’s capital investment decision appeared cost-

e ective and rational; viewed collectively, the decisions neutralized each other and

were irrational (just as happens when each person watching a parade decides he can
see a little better if he stands on tiptoes).28

Shareholders increasingly questioned why he stayed in textiles.
Bu ett replied that the mills were big local employers, the unions
had been cooperative, and he had hopes for modest pro ts. Also,
he felt a loyalty to Ken Chace, who had run the operation from the
start. As he reminded shareholders, it had been Chace’s e orts in
textiles that had provided the fuel for Berkshire’s growth.29 But in
private, Bu ett would occasionally warn Chace: “It looks like the
mill is going to start using cash. I don’t want that.”
Chace continued to labor mightily—almost (not quite) as
doggedly as Mrs. B. He switched product lines and fabrics. He
upgraded machinery. He improved relations with union leaders
(who knew that his boss in Omaha was a skin int). But he couldn’t
outrun the competition, of which the supply seemed unending.
Bu ett drew from this a broad maxim: a good manager was
unlikely to overcome a bad business.30 This led to a truism about
problem businesses in general: “ ‘turnarounds’ seldom turn …”31
In 1980, Bu ett halted production in Manchester and cut the
number of looms in New Bedford by a third. Still, in 1981, textiles
lost $2.7 million, rivaling some of the worst years of the Seabury
Stanton era. Bu ett told Chace, “If you can’t cut the overhead I’m
going to shut you down.” But Chace—to Bu ett’s rueful surprise—
pulled it o .

The purchase of the Furniture Mart, in 1983, put Bu ett’s mill
mistakes in stark relief. He nally (though obliquely) admitted in
public that his devotion to Ben Graham had caused him, for too
long, to stick with brick-and-mortar assets such as textiles at the
cost of overlooking Mrs. B-style franchises.
My escape was long delayed, in part because most of what I had been taught by the
same teacher had been (and continues to be) so extraordinarily valuable.32

But now, his thinking had “changed drastically.” The next year,
Chace retired. His replacement, Garry Morrison, an M.B.A. with a
degree in textiles, argued for an infusion of fresh capital. Bu ett
refused. And without new money, the mill, clearly, would continue
to bleed. In 1985, Bu ett shut it down.
Its four hundred workers, mostly skilled, ethnic Portuguese, got a
few months’ notice and job retraining, though many, if not most,
ended up in lower-paying work. They asked for severance above
what the contract guaranteed and, as David Lima, secretarytreasurer of the New Bedford Textile Workers Union of America,
recalled, got a month or so. “For guys who were losing their jobs, it
wasn’t worth a hill of beans,” Lima said.
The union also asked to see Bu ett personally. He coldly
responded that he saw no reason to meet.33 In Garry Morrison’s
view, “Warren wanted to be fair. He was fair, but not overly
generous.”
Bu ett was sensitive to just such a characterization. In an
epilogue to the a air, he noted that during the previous ve years,
250 other mills had also closed.34 During that time, Berkshire’s mill
had lost more than $5 million. Bu ett fancied that by running the
mill so long, he had found a “middle ground,” less ruthless toward
the workers’ interests than (the original) Adam Smith but more so
than Karl Marx—that is, willing to endure “subnormal
pro tability” but not “unending losses.”
Of course, as between the two, Bu ett had his “Marxist”
tendencies rather well hidden. He was willing to moderate Adam
Smith, and to sacri ce “a fraction of a point” on his rate of return

—but not to abandon Smith. Indeed, the point of his essay was that
to forsake Smith—to forsake capital—could be ruinous. The illdisguised hero of Bu ett’s essay was himself, for having followed
Smith and diversi ed out of textiles. Its devil was another yarn
mill: Burlington Industries. Burlington, he noted, had not
diversi ed; it had stuck to its knitting. During Bu ett’s bountiful
score and one years at Berkshire, Burlington had reinvested $3
billion back into textiles. It was now the biggest U.S. textile
company, but that was a dubious prize. For over those twenty-one
years, Burlington’s stock had pitifully crept from 60 to merely 68.
Adjusted for in ation, its investors had lost two-thirds of their
purchasing power. Marx might have approved, but Smith—and
Bu ett—did not.
This devastating outcome for the shareholders indicates what can happen when much

brain power and energy are applied to a faulty premise. The situation is suggestive of

Samuel Johnson’s horse. “A horse that can count to ten is a remarkable horse—not a
remarkable mathematician.”35

And a brilliantly run textile rm was not a brilliant business.
Ken Chace, in retirement on the Maine coast, judged that Bu ett
had run the plant ten years too long. He stressed that he treasured
his experience with Bu ett—“It’s hard to describe how much I
enjoyed working for him”—but was wistful for an expressiveness
that Bu ett had never shown. “One thing that’s always bothered
me,” Chace admitted. “I never knew why he picked me. When I
resigned, he said, ‘I remember you were absolutely straight with
me from the rst day I walked through the plant.’ That was all he
ever said.”
The mill’s subsequent fate con rmed Chace’s verdict that Bu ett
had been slow to close it. The equipment was auctioned to carrion
hunters for the laughable sum of $163,122. Looms purchased in
1981 for $5,000 apiece were sold in 1985 as scrap for $26 each.36
But Bu ett insisted on keeping the real estate on Cove Street. The
mill space was leased to tiny rms making silk screens, stage
assemblies, data-processing forms—and others with no memory of

the heyday of textiles. The old headquarters, where once Seabury
Stanton had proudly reigned from the Ivory Tower, would serve as
the o ce of BHR Inc.—Berkshire Hathaway Realty—its name a
ickering reminder of the once-great mills that sit like rotting ships
in the city’s south end.

Chapter 14

THE EIGHTIES

In 1984, Bu ett dropped in on J. Richard Munro, the chief
executive of Time Inc., at the company’s stately headquarters in
New York’s Rockefeller Center. Berkshire owned 4 percent of Time,
and Bu ett and Munro often talked media together. Now, as both
of them knew, Time was rumored to be a takeover target.
Bu ett thought he could help the magazine giant keep its
independence. “How would you like a white knight?” he asked. In
the parlance of the eighties, Bu ett was proposing a deal. In
Munro’s words:
Warren would have been a major shareholder and agreed to never sell. He would have
been our guy. We took it to our board, and they said, “Who is Warren Bu ett?”

It was still possible for a company, especially an institution such
as Time, to think of itself as immune. “That was before anything
hit the fan, before we were lying awake nights,” Munro noted.
Later, Time would discover that it was anything but immune.
Menaced by a hostile bid, it would merge with Warner
Communications and, in the process, thoroughly wreck its balance
sheet. Indeed, Time would be the most prominent example of the

self-destructive tactics of the merger era. In hindsight, Munro said
of Bu ett’s o er, “It’s too bad we didn’t do it.”
As Munro—and so many others—would discover, dramatic
changes were afoot. At First Boston, a sleepy rm where four
people had worked on mergers and acquisitions a decade earlier, a
sta of 110 were cranking out deals by the hour. And the pace was
accelerating. In 1975, Wall Street had racked up $12 billion in
deals; in 1984, $122 billion. Investment bankers, long seen as
staid, suddenly were objects of envy and resentment. Young, rich,
smugly powerful in red suspenders, they indulged in battle eld
metaphors and terri ed Main Street executives.
For a century, the Street had provided nancing at the behest of
corporate clients. Now the tables had turned. Wall Street’s
matchmakers were seizing the initiative; Main Street was merely
fodder for their deals. Hostile raids were being backed by a novel
form of nance, the junk bond, which had been pioneered by the
renegade Drexel Burnham Lambert, and which investors were
accepting as payment for whatever in ated sum the raiders
o ered. In this respect, the eighties bore a resemblance to previous
speculative eras. Indeed, Fred Carr, the fallen archetype of the GoGo market, had resurfaced as the head of First Executive, the most
ardent promoter of Drexel’s junk.
Of course, speculation was not new to Wall Street, nor was
merger mania. But the architecture of Wall Street had changed.
Fortune 500 companies were now, overwhelmingly, controlled by
professional shareholders such as pension and mutual funds. And
such investors uniformly took the high bid and ran. Once upon a
time, at least at well-performing companies, the major
shareholders’ commitments to management had been a force
inhibiting takeovers. By the mid-eighties, such commitments had
the half-life of a cup of co ee. Andrew Sigler, the CEO of
Champion International, complained that his stockholders changed
so fast he didn’t know who they were.1
Bu ett’s perspective had also changed. At one time, his view of
the Street had been exclusively that of a shareholder. Now, in
middle age, he also identi ed with CEOs—with the Dick Munros

and Andy Siglers. He was suspicious of the raiders and of the havoc
they caused in corporate boardrooms, and wary of stock prices
in ated by takeover fever. Once again, he felt that Wall Street was
going too far, as it had during the Go-Go era. But this time Bu ett
had no thought of quitting. In fact, he was hoping to do some very
big deals.
Bu ett’s entry in the grand game can be dated—February 26,
1985. In Washington for a couple of days, Bu ett got a call from
Tom Murphy, his friend and the chairman of Capital Cities.
“Pal, you’re not going to believe this,” Murphy began. “I’ve just
bought ABC. You’ve got to come and tell me how I’m going to pay
for it.”2
Thomas S. Murphy, like Bu ett, was the son of a politician. His
father was a Brooklyn judge and had exposed Tom to visitors such
as Thomas Dewey and Al Smith. After a charmed youth—summers
in the country, golf at the family club—Murphy went to the
Harvard Business School. A classmate, James Burke (later
chairman of Johnson & Johnson), thought Murphy was a natural
for politics, too. Tall and balding, Murphy was almost irresistibly
a able. He had an easy, unpretentious manner and addressed
people as “pal.” After a stint at Lever Brothers, he took an
$18,000-a-year job with Hudson Valley Broadcasting, managing a
bankrupt UHF station in Albany.
The humble Hudson Valley, which broadcast out of a home for
retired nuns, managed to acquire another station and went public
in 1957, at seventy-two cents a share. A few years later, Murphy
moved to New York, settling into a cozy brownstone o ce, and
tapped Daniel Burke (James’s younger brother) as his second-incommand. They operated as a team, with Murphy focusing on
strategy and deal-making and the harder-edged Burke on
operational details. The company, now known as Capital Cities,
gradually acquired an empire in broadcasting, cable, and
publishing. Its style, though, was anything but imperial. Murphy
and Burke delegated ample authority to their far- ung properties
and ran a corporate o ce that was bone-trim. Cap Cities had no
legal department and no public relations sta . Murphy was so

frugal that he had once painted only the two sides of his Albany
headquarters that faced the road—not the sides facing the Hudson
River. His and Burke’s blend of vision and cost-attentiveness
produced consistently superior pro ts.
Bu ett, who had met Murphy in the early seventies, knew that
anyone who didn’t waste paint on his headquarters was his sort of
guy. He bought 3 percent of Cap Cities for Berkshire in 1977, but
after a run-up in the stock he sold—a decision Bu ett would later
attribute to “temporary insanity.” Meanwhile, Murphy and Burke
began to check with Bu ett before each big move. One time, when
Walter Annenberg was mulling the sale of his publishing empire,
which included such gems as TV Guide and the Daily Racing Form,
Bu ett said, “Murph, how about the two of our companies buying
it on a fty- fty basis?”3 They went to see Annenberg in Beverly
Hills and o ered $1 billion. Annenberg turned them down, and
Bu ett and his “pal” went to a Swensen’s—just a couple of regular
guys with a billion bucks to burn—and drowned their sorrows over
milk shakes. But Bu ett’s dream of becoming Murphy’s partner
didn’t die. He often declared that the Murphy-Burke ensemble was
the best in corporate America.
Bu ett also had shown more than a passing interest in ABC. In
the late sixties, ABC had agreed to be bought by International
Telephone & Telegraph, but the Justice Department had blocked it.
Bu ett had been at the Paci c Stock Exchange when the deal had
fallen through. He turned to Ed Anderson, Munger’s associate, and
said, “You know, Ed, ABC is totally in the hands of arbitrageurs.
Anyone could get control. I sure wish I had the money.” He bought
a slice of ABC in 1979, and again in 1984. When Bu ett took
Murphy’s call, Berkshire already owned about 2.5 percent of ABC’s
stock.
Murphy was equally keen on ABC, which had lucrative local
stations and the prized jewel of a national network. Late in 1984,
it became apparent that the Federal Communications Commission
was going to raise the ceiling on television station ownership by a
single company, making a merger possible. Soon after, Murphy
dropped in on Leonard H. Goldenson, the seventy-nine-year-old

architect and chief executive of ABC, at the ABC building in New
York. “Leonard,” he began, “I don’t want you to throw me out of
the thirty-ninth oor, but I have an idea.”4 Goldenson did not
throw him out. ABC, he knew, was being stalked by raiders who, if
successful, were likely to dismantle the company that had been his
life’s work. If he had to sell, better to someone like Murphy, who
would keep the company intact.5
Two days later, Bu ett met Murphy and Burke in New York.
Bu ett began with a word of caution. “Think about how it will
change your life,” he warned. Murphy and Burke instantly
understood. Cap Cities, which owned such properties as Women’s
Wear Daily and the Kansas City Star, was little known outside its
industry, and Murphy and Burke led private lives. Now, Murphy, a
devout Catholic who liked to stop at St. Patrick’s Cathedral on his
way to work, would be thrust in the company of network
executives who rode to work in limousines.
Murphy was impressed that Bu ett’s rst thought had been “the
personal equation.”6 But Murphy wanted to go ahead.
Bu ett had another concern, which neither Murphy nor Burke
had anticipated. If Cap Cities bought ABC, then, by the perverse
jungle code on Wall Street, Cap Cities would itself be in play.
“What do we do about that, pal?” Murphy asked.7
Bu ett said, “You better have a nine-hundred-pound gorilla.
Somebody who owns a signi cant amount of shares who will not
sell regardless of price.” Obviously, that somebody would have to be
very rich, and totally loyal.
“How about you being the gorilla, pal?”
In a later account, Bu ett said he had not, until that moment,
envisioned a role for himself.8 But what other gorilla could he have
had in mind? Indeed, Burke’s impression was that he had thought it
all through. No sooner did Murphy pop the question than Bu ett
raised two obstacles to his going in.
Cap Cities owned a television station in Bu alo. If Berkshire
became its “gorilla,” then, because of FCC rules, either the station
or the Bu alo News would have to go. Bu ett said he couldn’t sell

the News. “I’ve got my life invested in that thing,” he noted.
Murphy agreed to sell the station.
The second issue was stickier. Again, under FCC rules, Bu ett
could not be on the boards of both the Washington Post and Cap
Cities. He had strong feelings about the Post, and also about the
Graham family. He wanted to mull it over.
They parted, and Bu ett ew back to Omaha. Thinking it
through, he decided that if he left the Post board but kept his stock,
his relationship with the Post could continue.*
That night, he called Murphy. Having worked out the numbers in
advance, Bu ett immediately proposed that Berkshire buy three
million shares of Cap Cities at $172.50 a share.9 That was the
current market price (up from the original seventy-two cents). †
Murphy instantly agreed. Bu ett now had a deal to buy 18 percent
of Cap Cities for half a billion dollars—eight times as big as his
most recent deal, with Mrs. B, and fty times the size of his rst
big media investment, in the Washington Post. Cap Cities, in turn,
would use Berkshire’s infusion of equity to nance its planned
purchase of ABC.
But the talks with ABC hit a snag. Bruce Wasserstein, cochief of
mergers at First Boston, was representing the network. The plump,
disheveled banker could be prone to goading clients into
overpaying, but when working for a seller he was brilliant. Cap
Cities’ rst o er was $110 a share, but under Wasserstein’s
prodding, Murphy, Burke, and Bu ett grudgingly went to $118—
twice as much as ABC’s recent market price. Still, Wasserstein
demanded more. On March 12, Murphy trudged over to the black
Third Avenue skyscraper of Skadden Arps Slate Meagher & Flom to
tell Joseph Flom, ABC’s attorney, that Cap Cities was pulling out.
But Flom wouldn’t let Murphy leave. He insisted that the deal
could be saved.10
That afternoon, both sides reconvened at Skadden. The group
was an eighties set piece, starting with Flom, a pioneer in the tiny
hostile raids of the 1950s. Now, no takeover was complete without
him. His friend and perennial rival in the merger wars, defense
specialist Martin Lipton, was working for Cap Cities. Wasserstein,

the nec plus ultra of deal-makers, led a team of bankers for ABC.
(Cap Cities, in accordance with Bu ett’s and Munger’s prejudice,
did not use an investment bank.) Filling out the powwow were
principals from ABC and Cap Cities.
But the real talking was handled by two: Bu ett and
Wasserstein. Michael Mallardi, the chief nancial o cer of ABC,
was struck by the contrast: the disarming, informal Midwesterner,
and the bright, intense, Brooklyn-born banker—younger, but not
at all intimidated. Wasserstein noticed that Bu ett dispensed with
the histrionics customary to negotiations and lightened things up
with jokes. He enjoyed doing battle with him. But they were $100
million apart. Now the banker’s tone got a little tense. He insisted
that, in addition to cash, ABC’s stockholders should get warrants to
buy Cap Cities stock. In other words, Wasserstein wanted them to
have the option of keeping a piece of the company they were
selling. “Our view was, if Bu ett was such a clever fellow—if he’s
buying why are we selling?” Wasserstein recalled. “We wanted a
kicker.”
Bu ett was dead-set opposed. He gave a little speech, saying
that he hated to issue stock, a practice that he had criticized in his
annual reports and, indeed, that had been verboten at Berkshire.
Then Wasserstein gave a speech, arguing that ABC’s shareholders
deserved a piece of the upside. Then he led the ABC group outside.
The talks were at an impasse.
When the ABC team returned, Bu ett blinked. “I know I’ll regret
doing this,” he began—and declared that Wasserstein could have
the warrants. The ABC people were stunned. Now each side had to
gure out what the warrants were worth. Wasserstein’s computer
mavens began to crunch a series of numbers. Bu ett, handling the
calculations for Cap Cities, simply did them in his head.11
Bu ett had saved an investment banking fee, but Wasserstein
had gotten the better of him. Unlike Munger, who a ected a vague
lack of interest, Bu ett may have wanted ABC—of which he would
now be the biggest individual owner—a bit too much. As Bu ett
predicted, he would come to regret the warrants.‡

Also, Bu ett’s price for Cap Cities—sixteen times earnings—was
steep for a Graham disciple. As he admitted to Business Week, “Ben
is not up there applauding me on this one.”12 Bu ett was betting
that Murphy and Burke would be able to trim the fat from ABC’s
stations and boost their pro ts. And in truth, Bu ett was running
out of opportunities. Stock prices were rising, and, as Berkshire
grew, Bu ett needed to make big investments; small ones had
become irrelevant. Outside the oil patch, the $3.5 billion ABC deal
was the biggest merger ever.
This record was not on the books for long. A raft of deals
followed, many of them hostile. Investment banks, breaking a
time-honored code, went after former clients. Corporate minnows
gobbled up whales. Wall Street had become a war zone.
The raiders obtained a certain celebrity. They styled themselves
as champions of the little guy, or, at least, the little shareholder.
The week of Bu ett’s big deal, T. Boone Pickens appeared on the
cover of Time, declaring himself an enemy of “entrenched”
corporate executives.13 A paper entrepreneur such as Pickens did
not actually acquire, much less reform, any of his targets. He
merely bought enough of their stock to drive them into the arms of
other suitors—at an immense pro t to himself.
But the tactics of target CEOs were no less self-serving. Many of
them forked over greenmail, a bribe (paid from the pockets of their
shareholders) to induce the raiders to go away and leave the CEOs
their jobs. Even big companies, such as Walt Disney (greenmailed
by Saul Steinberg), were cowed into paying up. Others, such as
Phillips Petroleum, bedeviled by Carl Icahn, were so intent on
making themselves unattractive to the bad guys that they went
deeply into debt, wrecking their own balance sheets before the
raiders could do it to them.
This strange game presented an opening for Bu ett. He was
hearing from quite a few CEOs that they were under siege.14 It
occurred to Bu ett that Berkshire could make an attractive babysitter. It had a reputation as an unmeddlesome, and stable, owner.
And, not needing nancing, it could move fast. For a desperate
CEO, selling to Bu ett could be a third route between succumbing

to a raider and resorting to self-immolation via greenmail. With
this in mind, Bu ett, in his letters, regularly touted Berkshire as a
safe harbor: “For the right business—and the right people—we can
provide a good home.”
In the fall of 1985, Bu ett got his chance. Scott & Fetzer was an
obscure but not small Ohio-based conglomerate, with units ranging
from World Book Encyclopedia to Kirby vacuum cleaners. Wall
Street had ignored it until 1984, when Ralph Schey, the chairman,
tried to buy it in a $50-a-share leveraged buyout. His o er was
cheap (only $5 above the market price), and speculators, sensing
that it would be topped, bid the stock to 53. Within a fortnight, a
bid, at $60, did appear—from Ivan Boesky, the arbitrageur.
Boesky, an obsessive and haughty trader, had become super-rich on
the strength of his connections to Drexel. It was not yet known, of
course, that Boesky was trading on illegal stock tips (for which he
would go to prison), merely that he epitomized Wall Street’s fastmoney culture. Schey, a nuts-and-bolts type, was repelled at the
thought of working for Boesky, and put o by Boesky’s insistence
that a deal include a $4 million “break-up fee” for Boesky.15 Schey
turned him down—but now he had a problem. Boesky, who owned
7 percent of the stock, would sell to the next bidder.
Schey cobbled together a new LBO, at $62, but the plan
collapsed. What was worse, his wheeling and dealing had driven
the stock into the hands of the “arbs,” the short-term speculators
(like Boesky) whose rst, last, and only interest was to sell the
company. Now Schey had to nd a buyer before the arbs did. In
the summer of 1985, Schey, to his horror, learned that Steven
Rales, a thirty-four-year-old nancier, and Mitchell, his twentynine-year-old brother, controlled 6 percent of the company. The
Rales were emblematic of a new breed of postpubescent raiders.
With little equity (but plenty of debt), they had taken over a chain
of small companies, and now, convinced of the limitless power of
leverage, they were batting their eyes at the prospect of Scott
Fetzer. Ralph Schey, meet the 1980s.
Bu ett had also coveted Scott Fetzer—and had also bought a
chunk of the stock. The company had a high cash return, and World

Book was the sort of publishing franchise that Bu ett craved. (It
didn’t hurt that he had read it as a boy.) And having followed
Schey’s travail in the newspaper, Bu ett sensed an opening. In
October, he dispatched a brief letter: “We own 250,000 shares. We
have always liked your company. We don’t do unfriendly deals. If
you want to pursue a merger call me.”16
For Schey, this was manna from heaven. He agreed to meet
Bu ett and Munger in Chicago, where they discussed a deal over
dinner. The next morning, October 23, Bu ett made a cash o er of
$60 a share. Schey had two demands: no “material adverse
changes clause” (a contractual loophole that allows the faint-ofheart to back out at the altar) and no “break-up fee.” Normally,
such demands would have been relayed to the investment bankers,
but Bu ett didn’t have an investment banker. He simply shrugged
and suggested that Schey write up a contract. A week later, for a
total price of $315 million, Bu ett had a very rich new prize.
Bu ett’s cash came from yet another deal, also in October: Philip
Morris’s shotgun (and unfriendly) takeover of General Foods.
Berkshire, the food company’s biggest holder, gleaned a $332
million pro t. “I’m not unhappy,” Bu ett chortled.17 His stock hit a
new high, $2,600 a share. That same month, Bu ett made the
Forbes list of billionaires, trailing, among others, Sam Walton, Ross
Perot, and Harry Helmsley.
Takeovers, obviously, had made Bu ett a good deal richer. But
despite his handsome pro ts, he was atypical of the deal age.
When compared to Ronald O. Perelman, who epitomized the
takeover artists, Bu ett was closer to its inverted image.
Both men were highly acquisitive and were shrewd judges of
companies, and they shared more traits as investors than one
might suppose. Perelman eschewed high-tech and looked for strong
cash ow. Like Bu ett, he took a long-term view and was, at heart,
a nancial person, not a manager. He once told Forbes that he
carefully read ten annual reports a week.18

On the other hand, the blustery Perelman did unfriendly deals;
Bu ett did not. Perelman was attracted to leverage; Bu ett
shunned it. Finally, Bu ett participated in deals only as a
shareholder in a public company, and his take was proportional to
that of other shareholders. This was not true of the vast majority of
deal-makers, who pro ted in ways (such as fees) that were
available only to insiders.
Perelman, in particular, had frozen out shareholders of
Technicolor and MacAndrews and Forbes—the two companies that
made him rich—allegedly at grossly unfair prices, and was
besieged by lawsuits following each. Bu ett had agreed to testify
as an expert witness against Perelman, on behalf of one claimant,
his friend Bill Ruane, who had owned MacAndrews and Forbes
stock. In the words of a lawyer involved in related litigation,
Bu ett was expected to say that Perelman “screwed the
shareholders.”19 Perelman vigorously denied that he had done so.
But the case was settled, averting what might have been an
interesting face-o .20
Simultaneous to Bu ett’s takeover of Scott Fetzer, Perelman
demonstrated the new rule of Wall Street—that once in play, a
company, as an independent entity, was doomed. As Connie Bruck
observed in The Predators’ Ball, Perelman’s assault on Revlon had
elements of class war. Michel Bergerac, the cosmetic company’s
aristocratic chairman, regarded the cigar-pu ng Perelman and his
Drexel nanciers as “pawnbrokers.” He curtly waved them o ,
saying the company was not for sale. Perelman sneered back,
depicting the lackluster Bergerac, who kept a butler and a suite in
Paris (his “castle,” Perelman called it), as an archetype of
corporate waste. In a normal time, the raid would have been sheer
fancy. Pantry Pride, Perelman’s vehicle in the ght, had a net
worth of only $145 million, while Revlon was worth over $1
billion. But Perelman, nanced with junk bonds, prevailed. Revlon
was his, and Bergerac was out of a job. He had been wrong in
saying that Revlon was not for sale. Everything was for sale.
In November 1985, a week after Perelman claimed his prize (he
decided, actually, to keep the butler and the castle),21 Bu ett

appeared at a seminar on hostile takeovers at Columbia Law
School. The panel and audience included CEOs, bankers, mergers
and acquisitions lawyers—among them Marty Lipton, licking his
wounds from his unsuccessful defense of Revlon—and a coterie of
academics.22 Takeovers were in their salad days. The Cap
Cities/ABC deal was only eight months old—the merger had not
even closed—and ve larger deals had already surpassed it. The
day before, Henry Kravis had stood before the Beatrice board and
o ered $6.2 billion to take the company private. A Beatrice
director, sensing the inevitable, burst into tears in the
boardroom.23 Money was ying around the Street so fast (Revlon
spawned $120 million in lawyers’ and bankers’ fees) it was a
wonder that anyone had come uptown, much less to have dinner
on an ivy-covered campus. But they wanted to see Bu ett.
No doubt the audience was thinking of Revlon, but Bu ett did
not refer to it. Appearing without notes, he spoke, instead, about
See’s Candy, and about himself. He had been investing for more
than forty years, since he had purchased three shares of Cities
Service at age eleven. In that yellowed, far-o memory, he
recalled, the stockholder’s position “as unquestioned boss” had
seemed very simple to him.
I wanted to see that little piece of paper that said I was the owner of Cities Service
Company, and I felt that the managers were there to do as I and a few other co-owners

said. And I felt that if anybody wanted to buy that company, they should come to
me.24

As an adult, he had felt the same way. If the manager at See’s
got an o er and didn’t tell him about it, Bu ett would have felt “a
little put out.” Someone had to make the decision on whether to sell
—it had to be the shareholders. It was their capital. It could not be
the CEOs—the Bergeracs of the world—any more than the guy
behind the counter at See’s.
Nor could he deny that shareholders were bene ting from
takeovers. Bu ett himself had reaped an immense pro t in General
Foods. What’s more, he said, “because my mother isn’t here

tonight, I’ll even confess to you that I have been an arbitrageur.”§
So he was pro ting from deals in that respect, as well. And Bu ett,
in the past, had scorned “entrenched” CEOs in terms not dissimilar
from the raiders’.
Yet now that the raiders were in the ascendant, he was deeply
troubled. CEOs were now his peers—in many cases, his friends. At
a visceral level, he was uneasy with the raiders’ confrontational
style. But his concerns went deeper.
I had this idea that some sort of economic Darwinism would work and that if o ers
were made, it was the invisible hand working and that it would improve the breed of

managers. And then over the years I’ve been troubled by two things I’ve observed—

and I don’t know exactly where this leads me—I’ll just tell you what bothers me. The
rst thing is that over a good many [years] the very best-managed companies I know

of have very frequently sold in the market at substantial discounts from what they
were worth that day.…

Takeovers, in theory, were a curative, the system’s method of
pruning corporate deadwood. In the neat economic model, assets
owed to the highest bidder because, by de nition, the high bidder
was the one who could put them to best use.
But the stock market was not always neat. Shares of even very
good companies, such as Cap Cities, occasionally could be had for
a song. A raider could gobble them up—not because Murphy and
Burke were managerial deadwood, but because their stocks were
subject to the depressive ts of Mr. Market. Even Boone Pickens, in
a too-candid moment, blamed the oil takeovers on the simple fact
that it was cheaper to drill for oil “on the oor of the New York
Stock Exchange” than in the ground.25 One day it was oil; the next
it was something else. To Bu ett, it was not corporate Darwinism
but corporate roulette. It could not be good for the Tom Murphys
of the world to be replaced by asset shu ers.
His other troubling observation was that takeovers were
distorting prices. Businessmen, like politicians and anyone else,
spent other people’s money more freely than their own. CEOs—

quite a few con ded in Bu ett—purchased better aircraft on the
company’s tab, and they ate at better restaurants.
And I also notice that when they eat companies, they behave a little di erently with
the shareholders’ money than they would with their own.

A raider with access to somebody else’s dough would pay a lot
more than a company was worth. And Wall Street’s soaring
appetite for junk bonds was providing a vast supply of easy
money. Junk bonds had become a kind of “phony currency”
(phony because bond buyers were thoughtlessly, and naïvely,
nancing borrowers beyond their means). Whoever could borrow
the most was winding up with the store. To Bu ett, this was truly
vexing. The trouble with debt was that it worked too well; people
got hooked and carried it too far. And he allowed that the new
borrowers would repeat this pattern. “I personally think, before it’s
all over, junk bonds will live up to their name.”
For 1985, this was strong talk. Junk bonds were thriving, and
defaults had been rare. Investors were or would soon be lining up
for such sure re credits as Allied Stores, Continental Airlines,
Macy, and Trump’s Castle (and many more that later would le for
bankruptcy).
Michael Bradley, a University of Michigan nance and law
professor at the Columbia seminar, protested. “I am troubled by
the use of the pejorative term junk to describe these high-yield
securities.” Bradley argued that the risks on such bonds were o set
by their (high) interest rates, just as was true on a triple-A bond.
There was no such thing as a bad bond.
In a theoretical sense, Bu ett agreed. The previous year,
Berkshire had made a lot of money buying the (then cheap) bonds
of a highly troubled creditor, Washington Public Power Supply
System. Bankrupt credits often were attractive on a price-to-value
basis; Michael Milken, Drexel’s junk-bond impresario, had gotten
his start trading just such “fallen angels.” Junk bonds of recent
vintage had the crucial distinction of not having yet fallen: they

were weak credits issued at par (full price), with a long way to fall
and little upside.
Bu ett, continuing in his “pejorative” vein, pointed out that the
issuers of those junk bonds were raking in very fat fees, as were
the deal promoters. To him, the takeover game resembled an
addiction, and Wall Street was pushing junk-bond “needles” to
keep the Street in a stupor. “It won’t die out without a big bang,”
Bu ett predicted. “There’s too much money in it.”
All this was very much on Bu ett’s mind in January 1986, just
after the Cap Cities merger closed, when he made a surprise
showing at the annual retreat for Cap Cities’ managers in Phoenix.
Noting that many big investors were reexamining their loyalties
“every hour on the hour depending on the stock price,” Bu ett
pledged that his investment in Cap Cities would follow him to the
grave—and, in fact, a bit beyond the grave.
I get asked what happens if I get hit by a truck. I usually say I feel sorry for the truck.

I have it arranged so that not a share of Berkshire Hathaway stock needs to be sold on
my death and [so] the behavior will conform to the promises I have made.26

Bu ett’s “promises” were designed to thwart any possible
designs of a Perelman, Pickens, or Kravis. He not only gave
Murphy and Burke the proxy power over his Cap Cities stock, he
also gave Cap Cities the legal authority over Berkshire’s freedom to
sell. Bu ett wouldn’t even be free to change his mind.
Bu ett tried to rationalize this unusual setup on economic
grounds. He made the point that Murphy would be able to focus on
the business without worrying about a raid. But Bu ett was
personally, as well as professionally, motivated. Murphy, with
whom Bu ett spoke virtually every week, was a close friend. In
this investment, the “personal equation” was just as important.
Bu ett remarked to an interviewer:
I will be in Cap Cities as long as I live. It’s like if you have a kid that has problems—
it’s not something we’re going to sell in ve years. We’re partners in it.27

The deal did have problems, even before it closed. Television ad
sales collapsed, and ABC went into free fall. The network nished
third in the ratings, in both prime-time programming and news.
Then it faced losses on baseball, football, the Winter Olympics, and
two ill-conceived dramatic specials. And its costs were out of
control.
A friend of Bu ett’s said, “I don’t think Warren had any idea of
the extravagance, of how poorly managed ABC was.” Peter Bu ett
recalls his dad’s reviewing expenses and ipping out over a
$60,000 orist charge. Burke got a similar shock when he walked
into the stylishly appointed ABC building before the closing: the
walls had been stripped bare of their Jackson Pollock and Willem
de Kooning paintings—which had been sold to pad the network’s
year-end results.28
In the rst year after the sale, a projected network pro t of $130
million melted into a $70 million loss. It would have been far
worse had Murphy and Burke not taken a scalpel to costs. On
Murphy’s rst visit to Los Angeles, the entertainment division sent
a white stretch limo for him. Thereafter, Murphy took cabs.29 At
the New York headquarters, the private dining room was closed.
Months later, Murphy and Burke sold the whole building to a
Japanese speculator (for a record $365 per square foot). They also
laid o
fteen hundred employees.
Bu ett lent an ear, but did not intrude. One time, he was in New
York when ABC was renegotiating rights to Monday Night Football.
Burke gured ABC would lose $40 million on it. But having already
cut back on glamour events, including sports, he didn’t want to
lose the National Football League’s showcase. “Warren stumbled
in,” Burke recalled, “and it was obvious he thought we should hold
the line.” Bu ett didn’t say much; he merely looked, in Burke’s
words, “like he smelled an odor.” Only as they were waiting for
the NFL to call back and nalize the deal did Bu ett speak up.
“Well,” he said glumly, “maybe they’ll lose our phone number.”
(They didn’t. Losses on the contract were even worse than
expected.)

Murphy and Burke were able to cut costs signi cantly. However,
the entire media business was becoming more competitive, due to
a plethora of new outlets in both television and print. The three
major networks were gradually losing viewers to cable and home
video. One time, as Bu ett and Murphy were watching Monday
Night Football on a large-screen TV, Bu ett exclaimed, “Isn’t that a
great picture?” Murphy allowed, “I liked it better on an eight-inch
black-and-white screen when there were only three networks.”30
Bu ett, needless to say, would have been happier with one
network. But despite turning bearish on media ahead of the pack,31
he made no attempt to get out. A couple of years after the merger,
Walter Annenberg ew to Omaha to get Bu ett’s opinion on
whether to sell his magazine empire to Rupert Murdoch. Bu ett
advised him that media, though still a good business, was
weakening. Annenberg got out at the top, but Bu ett made no
attempt to lighten up on his own holdings.
In Burke’s view, Bu ett paid a price for it. Cap Cities’ stock
soared to 630—at which point, Burke maintained, Bu ett had to
know it was overpriced. “He could have sold,” Burke said. Within a
year, the stock had plunged to 360.
One of the best young money managers thought Bu ett had sort
of lost it. “Warren has had three careers,” this investor-critic
explained. “In the old days, he was a scavenger. He looked for
value. Then it got hard to nd stu and he became a franchise
investor; he bought great businesses at reasonable prices. And then
he said, ‘I can no longer nd good businesses at even acceptable
prices, and I will take advantage of my size and teach the world a
lesson about long-term investing.’ We think he screwed up. It’s
stupid.”
Bu ett and Munger doubted that they could have done better
trying to dance in and out.32 For one thing, a buy-and-hold
investor put o the tax man—over time, a very big saving.‖ For
another, their long-term approach created opportunities: a Mrs. B
or Ralph Schey was more inclined to sell to an owner such as
Bu ett. And, knowing that divorce was not an option, Bu ett was
a bit—quite a bit—more circumspect in choosing a partner. To the

extent that he, or any investor, is not thinking about how and
when he will get out, he will be more selective on the way in. As in
a marriage, this is apt to lead to better results.
But the reason for Bu ett’s policy, “stupid” or not, was that
selling left him hollow, whereas staying with “Murph” he found
in nitely satisfying. As he expressed it to Business Week, selling a
familiar stock was “like dumping your wife when she gets old.”33
This was a strong comment from a guy who, in fact, had refused to
dump his wife after she had moved out on him. Bu ett revisited
this metaphor in one of his letters: here, selling a good stock was
like marrying for money—a mistake in most cases, “insanity if one
is already rich.”34
Buy-and-hold did have a nancial logic, but at Bu ett’s extreme
it can only be seen, as he put it, as a “quirk” of character,
appealing for “a mixture of personal and
nancial
considerations.”35 He liked to keep things—stocks, “pals,” anything
that lent a sense of permanence. To turn around and sell because
someone o ered “2× or 3×” was “kind of crazy.”36 Any other
investor, such as his young critic, would have deemed that Bu ett
was the crazy one. But Bu ett had always craved, and had always
felt enriched by, continuity: to work with the same people, to own
the same stocks, to be in the same businesses. Hanging on was a
metaphor for his life.
Bu ett carried his avoidance of debt to a similar—highly
personal—extreme. In 1986, Exxon, which enjoyed a triple-A credit
rating, had four times as much equity as debt. Berkshire had
twenty- ve times, a ratio that would have put a Puritan to sleep.37
But then, debt could lead to the supreme discontinuity, one
perhaps more painful than “dumping your wife”—losing control of
Berkshire. As Bu ett explained in Phoenix, debt was the nancial
temptress, the fatal “weak link”:
It’s a very sad thing. You can have somebody whose aggregate performance is terri c,
but if they have a weakness, maybe it’s with alcohol, maybe it’s susceptibility to

taking a little easy money, it’s the weak link that snaps you. And frequently, in the
nancial markets, the weak link is borrowed money.38

This prejudice for what was enduring, enlightened by a sense of
history, drove Bu ett’s critique of the LBO promoters. From the
moment a deal was hatched, these escape artists had in mind an
“exit strategy”—a “quaint term,” he called it, for the deal-maker’s
eagerness to ip his creation to the rst willing sucker (usually the
public).39 Since Bu ett de ned investing as an attempt to pro t
from the results of the enterprise, as distinct from the price
action,40 the LBO artists did not really qualify as “investors.” They
merely transferred assets from one pocket to the next. They did not
“create” value, which Bu ett de ned as adding to the sum of
socially useful or desirable products and services. Most often, their
pro ts stemmed merely from the huge tax savings that derived
from converting equity to debt (interest payments being
deductible).
Bu ett disapproved, both because the raiders’ bounty seemed
undeserved and because society was the poorer for the loss of tax
dollars. Embedded in his critique was a strongly conservative bias
that Mrs. B’s sort of work was more useful to society than what
went on at Merrill Lynch—that creating pies was more useful than
slicing pies. The LBOs, he argued (at another Cap Cities retreat),
did not “make the steaks taste better”; they didn’t “make the
clothes warmer or last longer”:
Now when you read about Boone Pickens and Jimmy Goldsmith and the crew, they

talk about creating value for shareholders. They aren’t creating value—they are
transferring it from society to shareholders. That may be a good or bad thing but it

isn’t creating value—it’s not like Henry Ford developing the car or Ray Kroc guring
out how to deliver hamburgers better than anyone else.… In the last few years … one
[company] after another has been transformed by people who have understood this
game. That means that every citizen owes a touch more of what is needed to pay for
all the goods and services that the government provides.41

At Cap Cities/ABC, Bu ett was trying to re-create a world where
people would not be thinking about “exit strategies.” Following the
deal, ABC, once the rockiest of the networks, became the most
stable one nancially, and a consistently strong player in daytime

soaps, evening news, and prime time. By contrast, CBS and NBC
struggled with repeated management shake-ups and continuing
doubts about the commitment of their respective owners, Larry
Tisch and General Electric. In Burke’s view, Bu ett’s investment
provided a margin of comfort, without which “we would have felt
di erently,” particularly during the industry’s severe recession. The
company would have been more leveraged and less able to
maneuver. Possibly, it would have met a fate similar to Time’s. In
the event, Murphy and Burke continued to wring out superior
pro ts, and Bu ett’s faith in them was vindicated by a spectacular
rebound in Cap Cities’ stock.
* Bu ett’s friend Bill Ruane took his Post board seat. The merger required Cap Cities to
divest its cable systems; they were sold, at Bu ett’s prompting, to the Post.
† The prices do not re ect a ten-for-one split in 1994.
‡ The warrants enabled each holder of ten ABC shares to buy one share of Cap Cities at $250.
Initially valued at $30, the warrants later soared to a peak price of $207.75.

§ Bu ett limited arbitrage to companies that had agreed to merge. Classic “risk arbitrageurs,”
such as Boesky, speculated on rumored deals and helped to put targets in play.

‖ Bu ett did sell stocks, of course, but usually after long holding periods. Berkshire’s

investments in three select stocks—Cap Cities, the Post, and GEICO—and its wholly owned
businesses, such as See’s Candy, were deemed by Bu ett to be “permanent.”

Chapter 15

PUBLIC AND PRIVATE

By the time of the Cap Cities deal, Bu ett had a following. There
were fty Bu ett-made millionaires in Omaha and hundreds
elsewhere around the United States.1 When he showed up at
Columbia Business School to speak on investing, two hundred fans
were turned away. Forbes called him a “folk hero.”2 There was a
dog in Kansas City named Warren and another in New York
answering to “Bu y.” William Oberndorf, a Stanford business
student, saw Bu ett once, turned down a job at McKinsey & Co.,
and made a watershed decision to enter investing. Christopher
Stavrou, a money manager, christened his son Alexander Warren.
Then there was Douglas Strang, an Omaha stockbroker who
idolized Bu ett but had never met him. When his wife, Marsha,
went into labor, Douglas reached for a copy of The Money Masters
and read aloud to her from the chapter about Bu ett, as though his
wisdom might explain the cosmic mysteries of their daughter’s
birth.3
By early 1986, Berkshire had broken $3,000 a share. In the
twenty-one years that Bu ett had been turning the veritable dross
of a textile mill into gold, the stock had multiplied 167 times;
meanwhile, the Dow had merely doubled. On Wall Street, Bu ett

was regarded with awe. When he told David Maxwell, chairman of
Fanny Mae, that he had invested in his company, Maxwell felt an
urge to rush to the window and shout, “Warren Bu ett’s buying our
stock!” Forbes unashamedly asked, “He doesn’t walk on water?”4
Headline writers dubbed him a “Midas,” a “wizard,” the “sage of
Omaha,” and (the alliterative favorite) the “oracle of Omaha.”
Perfect strangers besieged him with “deals.” A Pakistani émigré
pitched him a newsstand; a woman in Jackson, Mississippi, o ered
an antebellum mansion.5 (“With my idea and your money, we’ll do
OK,” Bu ett quipped.)6 Unnervingly, a man from Lincoln,
Nebraska, requested a $100 million “loan” to buy a “ranch.” When
Bu ett declined, the man showed up at Kiewit Plaza with a pistoltoting gunman. FBI agents, tipped o by the companion, arrested
the man as Bu ett sat calmly at his desk.7
Though in the public spotlight, Bu ett was standing guard over a
still uncommonly private life. So unlike the modern CEO, he did
not block out his time in advance, preferring to keep it
unencumbered. When Bill Graham (a son of Kay) asked when he
might stop by, Bu ett replied, “Come any time. I don’t have a
schedule.” Richard Simmons, president of the Washington Post Co.,
was amazed by the quiet in Bu ett’s emerald-green inner sanctum,
which was sparely out tted with miniature sculptures of bulls and
bears, an antique Edison stock ticker under a glass dome, a citation
for the Sun’s Pulitzer, family pictures (and one of Ben Graham),
and a plaid couch from which a cloud of dust issued at the merest
pretext.8 He did not have an electronic calculator, a stock terminal,
or a computer. “I am a computer,” he noted to an interviewer.9
When Bu ett was in his o ce, Simmons said, “Nothing seems to
happen, except Bill Scott [Bu ett’s trader] pokes his head in to say,
‘Ten million dollars at 125 ⅛; yes or no?’ The phone doesn’t ring
much. Bu ett has so much more time than the average CEO.” His
day was a veritable stream of unstructured hours and cherry colas.
He would sit at the redwood horseshoe desk and read for hours,
joined to the world by a telephone (which he answered himself)
and three private lines: to Salomon Brothers, Smith Barney, and
Goldman Sachs.10

No matter who told it, the story of rst seeing Bu ett had a ring
of innocence reclaimed. Seth Klarman, a young investment
manager, met the billionaire for breakfast at the Ritz-Carlton in
Boston. Klarman found him “as advertised”—waiting by the maître
d’ stand, with no one fussing over him or aware of who he was.
“He ate link sausage and eggs—the last person in America who ate
sausage.” Norman Lear, the Hollywood producer, saw the slightly
pudgy billionaire at the Omaha airport, holding his car keys, and
mistook him for a chau eur—a plain-faced fellow in tortoiseshell
glasses with thinning, unkempt hair. Only the untamable eyebrows
suggested an independence of spirit.
The writer Adam Smith found “a certain nostalgia in this
triumph of Middle America.”11 Bu ett was a billionaire who drove
his own car, did his own taxes, and still lived in a home he had
bought in 1958 for $31,500. He seemed to answer to a deeply
rooted, distinctly American mythology, in which decency and
common sense triumphed over cosmopolitan guile, and in which
an idealized past held rm against a rootless and too hurriedly
changing present. It seemed tting that Berkshire’s shareholders
included not only famous money managers such as Mario Gabelli
but also Eppie Lederer, a.k.a. Ann Landers, the columnist from
Sioux City, Iowa, who had met and befriended Bu ett and who
dispensed homespun advice to millions of ordinary Americans.
Bu ett was the advice columnist of Wall Street.
By the mid-eighties, Bu ett was (paradoxically) becoming
celebrated for his common touch. He was the subject of adoring
pro les with such folksy titles as “Aw, Shucks, It’s Warren Bu ett”
and “The Corn-fed Capitalist.”12 Such articles accented his selfdeprecating wit and modest lifestyle. A newspaper pro le written
by a friend of Carol Loomis maintained, “Bu ett does not relish the
role of celebrity that has been thrust upon him.”13? But that was no
longer true. When asked if his boss had changed, Verne McKenzie,
who had been Berkshire’s treasurer since the sixties, singled out
Bu ett’s delight onstage. “I never would have predicted that he
would have enjoyed the limelight and publicity,” McKenzie said.

Actually, he always had—but before, his stage had not been as
public. Bu ett had always been a talker, an entertainer, a selfchronicler. He was a marvelous interview, relaxed, self-e acing,
mocking himself as, say, a poor dresser. He was always telling
vignettes from his career; he seemed to have a compulsion to tell
and retell, to mythologize his past, whether with friends or giving a
talk. He sugarcoated his past, just a bit, not seriously distorting it
but occasionally embossing it around the edges, as if to perfect his
past. Don Danly, Bu ett’s high school chum, remembered that he,
Danly, had bought the rst pinball machine on his own; as Bu ett
told the story later, they did it together.14 Bob Russell, from grade
school, recalled their racing sheet, Stable-Boy Selections, as a onetime a air, etched in pencil. Bu ett described it in more grand
terms, as a “published” tip sheet.15
The thrust of Bu ett’s autobiographical shadings was less to
exaggerate his success than to strip it, somewhat, of the element of
ambition and calculation. For instance, Bu ett cast his enrollment
at Columbia in terms of his enchantment with Ben Graham—not as
a cool decision to settle for second best after Harvard rejected
him.16 Similarly, he liked to recall that he had resigned from
Graham-Newman and returned to Omaha with “no master plan,”17
and had organized Bu ett Partnership only at the behest of
relatives. This gives too little credit to Bu ett’s own initiative; by
the time the Omaha World-Herald reported that Bu ett had returned
from New York, the partnership had been up and running for three
weeks.18 Then, too, he liked to portray the idea of being Tom
Murphy’s “gorilla” as coming from Murphy, when Bu ett’s
footprints were all over it.19 He seemed to want to depict his
success as partly the result of serendipity, rather than his intense,
lifelong drive to get rich.
Actually, what friends liked about Bu ett was his absolute lack of
casualness—his never being halfhearted. Norman Lear said, “He
simply delights in his life. There is not a false bone in his body.”
What gave rise to such impressions was Bu ett’s genuine, even
juvenile, enthusiasm. He was informal but not “casual,” una ected
but not in the least blasé.

Bu ett tended to turn even ordinary pleasures into fetishes. A
pro le in New York magazine happened to note that he was “a
chronic guzzler of Pepsi-Cola, preferably laced with cherry
syrup.”20 Don Keough, Bu ett’s former neighbor in Omaha who
had once refused to invest with the young Bu ett, chanced to read
the article—and was incensed. Keough by now was president of
Coca-Cola Co. He wrote to Bu ett, o ering samples of the “nectar
of the gods,”21 and after further correspondence, Bu ett agreed to
sample the new “Cherry Coke,” then in the testing phase. “He sort
of became a Cherry Coke end,” Keough said. Indeed, Bu ett
began to drink about ve bottles of the stu a day (Pepsi was
gone; it vanished) and would scribble an occasional note to
Keough exclaiming his rather boyish delight. He stocked the o ce
with potato chips and what a visitor described as “thousands” of
bottles of Cherry Coke.22 When Keough ran into Bu ett—at a 1986
White House reception—he thought his old neighbor unchanged: “a
personable guy who loved life.”
Bu ett reached his psychic peak at the annual meetings of
Berkshire Hathaway. In the early years in Omaha, only a handful
of shareholders had attended these meetings, which had been held
in the cafeteria of its National Indemnity subsidiary. As a trickle of
holders began to come from out of town, Bu ett switched the
meetings to the basement of a hotel, the Red Lion. Then the trickle
became a tide. In 1986, Bu ett rented the mausoleum-shaped pinkmarble Joslyn Art Museum. Shareholders, clutching copies of his
reports, descended on Omaha like birds of spring—Bu ett
groupies, money men, Graham disciples, New York bankers,
retirees now rich and young investors aspiring to be rich. They
came in suits and shirtsleeves; they came from the East, the South,
the West Coast. While most annual meetings attract virtually no
one (for the reason that most are a waste of time), attendance at
Berkshire’s was 450. After the meeting, Bu ett shooed them to the
Furniture Mart, where Mrs. B unloaded a couple of oriental rugs
for $10,000.23
The meeting itself was a sort of Bartles & Jaymes gathering.
Tables were set up with co ee urns and tubs lled with cans of

Cherry Coke, the company’s “o cial drink.” Ninety- ve percent of
the shareholders had been in the stock for at least ve years24—a
level of devotion unique on Wall Street—and most had the vast
bulk of their savings in this one stock. The investors, then, were
unusually beholden to it, and to its high priest. They were a sect, a
cult of which Bu ett was the object. They noted his every gesture
and casually o ered remark as though it were suitable for framing.
They felt a vicarious brilliance, as if they deserved a bit of the
credit—if not for being geniuses, then for having found one. The
cult had its own dogma (“Graham-and-Dodd” investing), and its
members had the felt superiority of true believers.
There was James Lake, a metallurgical engineer from Tucson
who had read Graham and Dodd, and Ronald Melton, who ran an
insurance rm in Pocatello, Idaho, and Michael O’Brien, a
photographer from Austin who had met Bu ett on assignment,
read his letters, and bought the stock. Then there was Thad
McNulty, a Jacksonville money manager who so revered the man
from Omaha that he brought his wife—to celebrate their wedding
anniversary.
It was a faith healing, too, for Tim C. Medley, a Jackson,
Mississippi, nancial planner. His wife drawled in astonishment,
“You’re going to spend $1,000 to go all the way to Nebraska to
hear a man talk?” Medley only owned one share. “Maybe I’m a
little crazy about this,” he admitted, “but if you practice a faith,
you go to the church. Bu ett energizes me.”
Medley caught his rst sight of Bu ett in an archway of the
Joslyn. Bu ett was greeting investors in a blue blazer and gray
slacks. His hair was tousled and his belt was worn thin from notch
marks. He could have been a high school basketball coach: a “plain
man” of whom Medley was in awe.
As Bu ett and Munger went to the podium, the crowd settled
into a reverential silence. A quart of Cherry Coke stood on the dais
like a sacrament. Bu ett raced through the formal business of the
meeting and opened the oor to questions. He deadpanned that
anyone who had to leave early should do so while Munger—not
Bu ett—was talking. Then the two of them embarked on a

rambling, uncut version of the annual reports, taking questions on
Berkshire and on business in general for hours.
Munger played the dour sidekick. He sprinkled his remarks with
references to “the civilization,” which he seemed to feel was in
peril. He said at one meeting: “The intelligence in this room is
remarkable.” But he did not go in for the meetings’ carnival aspect.
Adulation struck him as unseemly.25
Bu ett ate it up. He cracked joke after joke, and as he panned
the crowd his eyebrows seem to waltz about his forehead. He loved
seeing the same faces—people he had known for years, people he
had made rich beyond all dreams, people such as the humble Doc
Angle, who was now worth $15 million.26 Bu ett told a friend that
he felt as if he were painting a vast, open picture that everyone he
knew could admire.27 This messianic attachment to Berkshire
explains why he was unwilling to sell even a single share, and
also, perhaps, why he turned the meetings into a ritual. He talked
about in ation, Mrs. B, and management. He took questions on
investing, Cap Cities, and Ben Graham. Now and then, he would
respond with a story that was concise and to the point, yet so easy
on the ear that one imagined the speaker to be sitting back in his
rocker on a lazy summer’s afternoon.
One time, when Bu ett was speaking o -the-cu to a group at
Cap Cities, he was asked what techniques he recommended to
managers. He launched into a tale about a stranger in a small
town. The fellow wanted to get acquainted with folks, so he went
over to the village square and saw an old-timer with “kind of a
mean-looking German shepherd.” Bu ett continued:
He looked at the dog a little tentatively and he said, “Does your dog bite?” The old-

timer said, “Nope.” So the stranger reached down to pet him and the dog lunged at

him and practically took o his arm, and the stranger as he was repairing his shredded
coat turned to the old-timer and said, “I thought you said your dog doesn’t bite.” The
guy says, “Ain’t my dog.”28

The moral for managers: It’s important to ask the right question.

Bu ett was forever dropping these little “pearls,” even in small,
private settings. One Saturday, Steven Gluckstern, a touted but
reluctant prospect for Bu ett’s insurance company, ew in for an
interview. It was a bitter-cold Omaha morning. Gluckstern, who
had read Bu ett’s press notices, was nervous about what he would
be like in person. Bu ett greeted him in a annel shirt and khaki
pants, and immediately put him at ease. He didn’t really interview
him. He talked to him, in conceptual terms, about risk-taking.
“Hey, Steve,” he said, “you know, when you go into a poker game,
you look around, there is always one patsy. If you look around and
you can’t tell who the patsy is, that’s ’cause it’s you.”29
This was Bu ett’s way of warning him not to broker risks he
didn’t understand. Gluckstern felt his host was like the author of
those annual letters—dropping one-liners which, in context,
seemed highly meaningful. He accepted on the spot.
One thinks of the young Warren who had stood in the corner at
fraternity parties, taking the other fellows’ questions, or who had
sat in the Brandts’ Manhattan living room with cronies at his feet.
“Jesus and the apostles,” Roxanne Brandt had called them. Then he
had been entirely private. Though now he was also a public
person, he was surrounded by apostles still.
In Bu ett’s case, this usual distinction between private and
public was blurred. His friends were also his apostles. They called
on him regularly for advice and counsel. Stan Lipsey turned to
Bu ett for advice on how to disentangle himself from a girlfriend.
Richard Rainwater, the Texas nancier, went to him for periodic
“reality checks.” In 1986, Bu ett urged Rainwater, then at a
crossroads, to stay away from anything even remotely unseemly; a
few extra dollars weren’t worth it, he warned. Rainwater found it
memorable when, a short while later, some of Wall Street’s leading
lights were dragged away in handcu s. Jack Byrne spoke of Bu ett
as though he were some sort of national treasure. “Some people
who know Warren don’t share him,” Byrne complained. “I deserve
some credit for sharing him.”
Every odd year, Bu ett’s inner circle—the so-called Graham
group—convened at a resort. In the beginning, it had just been

Bu ett and a bunch of investment pals—very stag and very cheap.
At the second meeting, in Palm Beach, Florida, a bellhop was so
ticked o by one of their chintzy tips that he heaved it against a
door.30 Another time, the ultrarich Sandy Gottesman hooked up
with the group at the airport, expecting to y rst-class. But no
one else was; Gottesman stammered something about his secretary
having made a mistake and switched to coach.31
More recently, the seminars had gotten tonier and less inbred.
They met in places like Scottsdale, Arizona, Sun Valley, Idaho, and
on board the Queen Elizabeth 2. Also, Bu ett invited spouses and
friends—such as Carol Loomis and Tom Murphy—who were not
narrowly nancial. One time, the group went rafting on the
Colorado River, whereupon the patrician Key Graham was moved
to remark, “I have never had my ass this wet in my life.”32
Bu ett considered these retreats with friends to be especially
enjoyable times, and rather private ones. He was extremely fond
of his friends, as they were of him. Yet the gatherings had a
reverential aspect not wholly dissimilar from the annual meetings.
These few dozen friends, though highly successful on their own,
willingly regrouped under Bu ett’s mantle—almost in celebration
of him. The guest list was Bu ett’s: only he decided who could
come. One longtime member said, “There is a palpable desire of
people to be seated at the same table with him. You get the feeling
—will he sit at my table?” Peter Bu ett, a young musician, sensed
that his father’s friends yearned to be in his company. Relaxing in
his studio beneath a picture of John Lennon and Yoko Ono, Peter
likened them to a group of talented but lesser musicians with his
Beatles idol. Ed Anderson, a charter member, regarded Bu ett as
“a sort of miracle man.” While Bu ett’s demeanor at these gettogethers was unassuming, there was a sense in which these
private friends—some of them, at least—were a more familiar
form of the “audience” that Bu ett had with public shareholders.
Most of Bu ett’s older friends also were his shareholders. This set
him at the curious remove of being responsible for many of his
friends’ and family members’ wealth. They talked about Bu ett,
and about the stock, obsessively. Indeed, at every step of the way,

they agonized over it. Marshall Weinberg, Bu ett’s stockbroker
friend, urged a client to wait for a better price when Berkshire was
at $77, and repeated this counsel at $105.33 Henry Brandt, another
longtime Bu ett pal, was forever polling fellow disciples about the
outlook for Berkshire. At $1,700, he panicked and sold his wife’s
stock.
Conceptually, selling was at odds with the reason for owning
Berkshire—which was to let Bu ett manage the money, rather than
to make such calls oneself. But the stock’s rise was so out of the
realm of ordinary experience that people lost their nerve. Keith
Wellin, the president of Reynolds Securities, had bought some
Berkshire at $40, and a little more at $43. When it went to $50, he
decided to wait for the price to fall. He waited … and waited. He
nally bought some more at $3,000 a share.
Weinberg, a friend for decades, obsessively analyzed the possible
nancial consequences to himself of Bu ett’s dying. How much
would the stock go down—$1,000 a share? $2,000? And Weinberg
was hardly alone. It was as if Bu ett’s health were merely a
nancial concern. Witness the exchange at an annual meeting:
I’m thinking of making a purchase of Berkshire but I’m
QUESTIONER

: concerned about something happening to you, Mr.
Bu ett. I cannot a ord an event risk.

BUFFETT

:

Neither can I.34

The blurring of Bu ett’s roles extended to his family. In writing
his annual letters he envisioned that he was writing to Roberta, his
adored younger sister. But when he was with Roberta, he kept her
at a respectful distance. Roberta, who lived in California, was
conscious of not wanting to intrude on her brother, and she took
care to be succinct when she asked him a question.
She found his answers “wonderful,” but she couldn’t adopt “the
usual format,” as she would with “regular people.” She was acutely
aware of “interrupting,” Roberta explained. “He wants to get back

to what he’s thinking about. It’s like a cloud of concentration, a
physical cloud, is surrounding him.”
Bu ett acknowledged that he had public and private personas—
or, as he put it, that he was an introvert at home and an extrovert
on the road.35 This division was mirrored, in a rough sense, by his
two female companions. Susie was Bu ett’s rst lady in more
public settings, such as the Graham group seminars, or the
Berkshire annual meetings, or with their scores of friends in New
York and California.
Susie herself was extremely outgoing. Though she had moved
into a tonier apartment in San Francisco, she did not spend much
time there. When one of her kids or a friend needed help, or if
someone was sick or even dying, Susie would simply pick up and
move in for weeks on end. When Bella Eisenberg, a friend in
Omaha and an Auschwitz survivor, wanted to revisit the camp site,
Susie thought nothing of hopping on a plane with her. She traveled
widely, including (owing to her interest in population control) to
such removes as India, Turkey, and Africa. As Susie said, she lived
“in the sky.”36 She also looked after people in San Francisco, where
she took an AIDS patient into her home. But the connective tissue
in her later, nomadic life was not home or routine but being on
loan to people who needed her—including her husband. “The
mystery,” one of Bu ett’s associates remarked, “is that he is still
madly in love with her.”
Astrid, his partner in Omaha, was quite private—as Bu ett was
when in Omaha. She spent her mornings at the local zoo, working
on the plant life, and usually could be found there in jeans and a
sweatshirt, digging in the dirt. She and Bu ett didn’t socialize
much. When Bu ett was at home, he hung out in his “pit,” a small,
private space o the living room, formerly the family sunroom,
where he kept his papers and books and had a large TV. For meals
—breakfast included—he often grabbed a ham sandwich or ate
vanilla ice cream out of the container. Their quiet companionship
suited Astrid, whose upbringing had been so unsettled. Once, at a
holiday gathering, Warren’s sister Doris bluntly asked Astrid how it

was going. She blushed and said Warren was “the most wonderful
man to live with.”
Bu ett’s hunger for solitude, and its o shoot, simplicity, was
palpable on the fourteenth oor of Kiewit Plaza—what he wryly
termed the “world headquarters” of Berkshire Hathaway. Though it
was now a Fortune 500 company, Bu ett’s corporate sta in the
mid- to late eighties totaled merely eleven people: two secretaries,
a receptionist, three accountants, the trader, a treasurer, an
insurance manager, Gladys Kaiser (his longtime assistant), and the
boss. Berkshire had no lawyers, no strategic planners, no public
relations or personnel people—no support sta such as guards,
drivers, messengers, or consultants. There were no rows of analysts
tethered to cathode ray tubes—none of the sacred totems of the
modern corporate village.
This spartan style was part of a deliberate e ort to minimize
what Bu ett termed “institutional dynamics.”37 he had hired a oor
of traders, they would have found something to trade; lawyers, no
doubt, would have found someone to sue.
A compact organization lets all of us spend our time managing the business rather
than managing each other.38

For a Wall Street investment banker, the trek to this citadel of
capitalism was not easily forgotten. John Otto, a Bear Stearns
man, got his rst shock at the Red Lion. Otto had come with a
client who was selling a company in the natural gas business.
When he told the hotel doorman they were going to Berkshire
Hathaway, the fellow gave him a blank stare. When they did
manage to nd Kiewit Plaza, Otto was surprised to see a “ ve-anddime building” opposite a pizzeria. There was no sign, either
outside or in the lobby, indicating that it was the domicile of
Warren Bu ett, Inc.
Bu ett greeted his visitors in Kmart-style shoes. After a little
small talk, he beckoned Otto’s client to make his pitch. Now
Bu ett’s features became totally concentrated. He pursed his lips
and furrowed his brow, practically driving the thickets of his

eyebrows into his spectacles. After listening for ninety minutes or
so, Bu ett began to ask some questions. The economics of natural
gas are complicated; regulation is involved; there are legal issues,
social issues. Otto had sent Bu ett a package of information, and
Bu ett knew it cold. As the client divulged new material, he
recalculated the economics on the run. Otto noticed that he had not
brought notes with him; he had no minions running in and out to
prop him up with data. It was all solo. After three or four hours,
Bu ett made an o er, subject to some fact- nding. Otto was
stunned again—executives do not make o ers on the basis of a
single session. (Ultimately, the deal fell through.)
This ability of Bu ett’s to cut through the clutter suggests a
certain genius. Bu ett focused so exquisitely on his object, and his
simplicity was a counterpart to that genius. He recognized that
layers of added executives—though each might be bright, earnest,
well-intentioned, etc.—would blur his focus. Much of the “work”
they might “accomplish” would be unnecessary work. (A Bu ett
aphorism: “That which is not worth doing is not worth doing
well.”)39 He did not like protracted decision-making or drawn-out
and contentious bargaining. His negotiating style was to seek or
propose o ers on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. And once he made a
decision he did not reverse it.
Bu ett and Bill Scott alone handled the investing—a job that at
other rms was divided among scores of traders and analysts. Scott
was not even full-time; he left the o ce at three to practice in a
polka band. In any case, Bu ett did the research, and Bu ett made
the decisions, in sweet solitude (consulting by telephone, of course,
with Munger). By contrast with this one-and-a-half-man band, the
Harvard University endowment, which had roughly the same size
portfolio, had a sta of more than one hundred.
Bu ett’s Kiewit coworkers were little more than a backdrop—
unobtrusive, robotlike, and unerringly dependable. According to
daughter Susie, “All of the people in that o ce are the same. They
don’t talk. They just do their work.”
The most essential one to Bu ett was Gladys Kaiser, his secretary
and assistant. She kept intruders at bay and brushed o inquiries

in a at monotone.
The treasurer, Verne McKenzie, a native of Fremont, Nebraska,
with a wispy frame and steely blue eyes, typi ed the sta ’s
loyalty. McKenzie had never—not once since the 1960s—asked
Bu ett for a raise. “If I ever felt I wasn’t making enough and he
didn’t agree, then I must have been wrong,” McKenzie said dryly.
(In the sixties and seventies, Bu ett paid him skimpily. But by
1986, McKenzie was making $198,000.)
In all the time since the early seventies, when McKenzie had
returned from New Bedford to Omaha, Bu ett had never raised his
voice in McKenzie’s presence. Nor had he given McKenzie an
inkling of his inner thoughts. “I wouldn’t talk if I thought it would
hurt him,” McKenzie noted, “but Warren is such a private person I
don’t think it’d be possible.”
There was no intellectual peer among this trusty crew—no one
who might break Bu ett’s sweet seclusion. He was cheerful with
the sta , but not talkative, as he was with his pals. Save for when
he had a visitor, he lunched alone, often sending a secretary to
McDonald’s (“Quarter Pounder with cheese and french fries”).
Bu ett had talked to his sons about joining him, but he simply had
no place for an understudy. Munger said it was lucky that the
heads of Berkshire’s operating units, such as See’s Candy, did not
work in the same o ce. Close up, comparing oneself to Bu ett
would be “hard on the human ego.”40 His intensity was better at a
distance.
The one time that Bu ett took an apprentice, he hired Daniel
Grossman, a young tennis star who had grown up in Omaha and
gotten an M.B.A. at Stanford. Grossman would not discuss the
experience, but according to colleagues, he seemed to have been
overwhelmed. Most likely, Bu ett was a remote mentor. He
seemed to converse only when he had a purpose. “The motor was
always running,” a lawyer in Omaha said of Bu ett. “There had to
be an analytical content.”
What Bu ett expected from the relationship with Grossman isn’t
clear. Peter said, “It was the rst attempt at my dad’s passing stu
to the next generation. It was just botched. He didn’t know how to

do it.” Bu ett did not assign projects to sta ers or work with them.
“If Dan was hoping to watch how he worked and to learn from it—
that’s not what happens there,” Bu ett’s daughter noted. “You
can’t watch it. It’s in his head.” Most of what “happened there”
was Bu ett thinking and reading.* Grossman ultimately quit and
became a successful investor in California.
In 1986, Bu ett departed from form and bought a used Falcon
aircraft. As corporate jets go, this one was modest (it cost
$850,000), but it was the type of corporate frill that he had long
criticized. He kiddingly disclosed its purchase in tiny letters in the
annual report and damned it as “very expensive” and a “luxury.”41
However uncomfortable he was with the idea of the jet, he loved
the jet itself. Nor was it really a departure, since it extended the
isolation of Kiewit Plaza to the air. As Bu ett explained to a pal,
he had been traveling more, and other passengers had begun to
recognize him. Often they had tried to feel him out on the market
—an intrusion he abhorred.42
Bu ett’s eccentricities, though the stu of a gifted investor,
worked against him as a manager. He was better with abstractions
than with operational detail, better with numbers than tangible
problems, too jealous of his independence to be intimately
involved with others on a daily basis.
And by 1986, he was managing a huge conglomerate—certainly
a role he had never aspired to. Bu ett tried to o set his managerial
shortcomings by restricting his role at World Book, See’s Candy,
and such to a very few big decisions.43 † He liked to say that one
didn’t need a big “circle of competence”—but it was important to
know where the “perimeter” was.44 And Bu ett was unusually
aware of his own limitations. As applied to managing, he picked
the chorus line but didn’t attempt to dance (no “advice” on carpets
for Mrs. B). Where other managers often created problems by
interfering, Bu ett’s native genius for simplicity averted them.
Bu ett did not require his various unit managers to forecast their
earnings. (Computer models of such things were deceptive: they

lent the future an air of “false precision.”)45 He did not schedule
meetings. (Chuck Huggins, the president of See’s Candy, didn’t set
foot in Omaha for twenty years.) Nor did Bu ett attempt to impose
a Berkshire corporate “culture” from above. At Scott Fetzer, the
Harvard-trained Ralph Schey used the full panoply of modern
business tools: budgeting, planning, and so on. Mrs. B
used … well, other methods. But Schey and the Blumkins
appreciated Bu ett for an identical reason—he allowed them to
run their businesses nearly without strings.
We have no one—family, recently recruited MBAs, etc.—to whom we have promised
a chance to run businesses we have bought from owner-managers. And we won’t
have.46

In all this, Berkshire was a most odd conglomerate. In fact, it
was odd as a modern institution. The modern era is one of
specialization; it has, in fact, made a cult of specialization. This is
why historians churn out dissertations on shoe sizes in
Bonapartean France and why the average pro football team now
has a larger sta than did President Coolidge. In the corporate
suite, its manifestation is chronic oversta ng. The common thread
is that historians, football coaches, and CEOs are equally fearful of
shouldering, or even delegating responsibility for, big decisions.
Bu ett’s Berkshire bore more structural likeness to King Arthur’s
court. Power was concentrated at two levels—that of the operating
chiefs, and that of Bu ett himself. As CEO, Bu ett hired (and,
potentially, red) the operating managers. He controlled their
capital in- ow or out- ow. His third, unspoken job was motivating
his managers-some of whom, such as Stan Lipsey, were his friends,
but many of whom were not.
Ralph Schey knew Bu ett only through work. He sent him a
monthly nancial report (which Bu ett demanded from all his
businesses, and which he virtually memorized). Occasionally, Schey
wrote a narrative to give Bu ett a hands-on feeling for the
business. And once a month or so, they talked on the phone. But

Schey had to initiate such calls. Bu ett never called him. And Schey
had a latitude that would have been unthinkable elsewhere.
When Schey proposed a plan to reorganize World Book’s sales
managers, Bu ett was skeptical but let him go ahead. The shake-up
was disastrous to morale and spurred a 20 percent drop in sales.47
“It never should have happened,” Schey conceded. Still, Bu ett
didn’t second-guess him.
The inspirational power in this approach is not to be taken
lightly. Except on June 30 and December 31, when Schey was
obliged to transfer his pro ts to Omaha, he felt as if the business
were his. In a practical sense, he was free to run it for the long
term, as a private owner would. Like Berkshire’s other, lowsalaried managers, he had a potentially lucrative incentive clause
(the exceptions were Bu ett and Munger, whose compensations
were xed at $100,000). But Schey was also motivated by Bu ett
personally. Like a kid on report-card day (Schey’s own analogy),
he hated to bring Bu ett bad news.
“The personal responsibility he creates is unique,” Schey
explained. “We don’t govern Scott Fetzer the way Berkshire
governs us. We have forty people in our corporate o ce. We have
budgets, we have annual plans, long-term plans. We make up
rules. We don’t have any of that with Berkshire.”
If managers had a complaint with Bu ett, it was that he was too
remote. He never interceded, and when asked for advice, he was
often elliptical. He would “drop a pearl,” as one of them said—a
verse from his Zen of capitalism intended to shed some light, as if
his managers, too, were “apostles.”
For some of the managers, pearls were not enough. When the
head of Borsheim’s, the jewelry store, died, he was succeeded by his
greenish son-in-law, Donald Yale. Yale needed a bit of help. He
found that Bu ett was good with the numbers but was not willing,
or not able, to walk him through the business. When Yale asked an
operating question, Bu ett would generalize or give a self-e acing
dodge.48
As far as is known, Bu ett had never red a manager—rather
remarkable, given the breadth of his career. He was clearly

displeased with George Aderton, the president of a tiny Bu ett
holding, Citizen State Bank of Mount Morris, Illinois, in the 1970s.
(Bu ett wrote Aderton how “irritating” and “annoying” he found
his allegedly inaccurate reports—for Bu ett, strong words.)49 But
rather than get rid of Aderton, Bu ett got rid of the bank.
A cautious approach to rings makes good business sense,
particularly compared to the Steinbrenner
re-at-the-ready
alternative. But Bu ett’s extreme delity suggests that, as with
holding on to stocks, “personal” considerations were a factor. He
was much better at motivating with a carrot than with a stick;
while he disliked confrontation, he was a master atterer. In a
typically adroit paean, Bu ett wrote:
When I call o

the names of our managers—the Blumkin, Friedman and Heldman

families, Chuck Huggins, Stan Lipsey, and Ralph Schey—I feel the same glow that

Miller Huggins must have experienced when he announced the lineup of his 1927
New York Yankees.50

While his individual businesses racked up exceptional returns on
capital, they grew at only modest rates, for which Bu ett deserves
some blame. He was chary of reinvesting in them, possibly because
of his failure in textiles. Thus, World Book was slow to put out an
electronic edition, and Borsheim’s ignored the opportunity to
exploit its reputation by adding stores.
Bu ett did not rule out expansion; he simply demanded that a
Blumkin, a Lipsey, or a Schey convince him that said manager
could do more by retaining a dollar of earnings than Bu ett and
Munger could do by investing it elsewhere. The manager who did
not convince sent a dividend to Omaha. Bu ett applied the same
equation to himself at the corporate level. That is, if he and
Munger could not nd superior investments, it would be time for
Berkshire to stop growing and to pay dividends to shareholders.
* Bu ett’s reading included rst of all the Wall Street Journal, and then the Omaha World-

Herald, the New York Times, USA Today, the London-based Financial Times, various

magazines and industry journals, and massive quantities of nancial statements.
† Two exceptions to his hands-o policy: Bu ett often determined price increases for See’s
Candy and the Bu alo News.

Chapter 16

CRASH

I have never met a man who could forecast the market.
WARREN BUFFETT,

BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY ANNUAL MEETING, 1987

By the mid-1980s, Berkshire was being driven by the engine of
insurance. Its group of property and casualty companies, which
was headed by National Indemnity, and which had o ces in
Omaha, New York, and elsewhere, was providing vast sums of
dollars for Bu ett to reinvest. Those dollars, as he put it, were
being traded for “promises”—cash today, as against indeterminate
future claims. The calculations involved in such exchanges were
second nature to him. Bu ett thought of everything in terms of
odds: horse races, plane crashes, even nuclear war. Once, at a
meeting of the Graham group, with twenty- ve of his confreres, he
bet Carol Loomis that at least two people in the room would have
the same birthday.1 She was shocked when Bu ett proved right.
The simple (but surprising) explanation was that the mathematical
odds of this occurring were 60 percent. Insurance, similarly,
reduced all experience in life to mathematical probabilities.
Bu ett’s buddy and fellow insurance executive Jack Byrne never

forgot when Bu ett met him at the University Club in Washington
with three mysterious dice, each with an unusual assortment of
dots. Bu ett made a proposition: Byrne could pick whichever die
he wanted and Bu ett would take one of the two that remained.
Bu ett assured him that if they then rolled twenty times, Bu ett
would win. “I got out my H-P calculator,” Byrne recalled. “I wasn’t
going to be shown up in my own business.”
I added up the probabilities. I picked one and Warren takes one of the other two and
wins fourteen times. Then he says, “You want to do it again—for lunch?” So this time,

I pick the die that Warren won with. Now he wins sixteen times. So I go back to the
H-P. He’s sitting there with a shit-eating grin on his face.

For each die, one of the other two would always beat it. If you
picked the right die and rolled enough times, you simply couldn’t
lose. That was insurance: if you gured out the odds of a
hurricane, or a three-car fatal, and priced your policies accordingly,
you were playing with loaded dice.
Bu ett had always been more involved in insurance than in his
other entities, and had always known that—unlike, say, candy—
insurance had the potential to grow o the charts. But in no other
business had growth been accompanied by so many setbacks. In
the 1970s, Berkshire had been burned by auto insurance fraud in
Florida and disastrous levels of workers’ compensation claims in
California. Its subsidiaries in Texas, Minnesota, and Iowa had been
shut down altogether. And the growing tendency of juries to ladle
out big awards had resulted in discomforting shocks. When Bu ett
met with his managers at National Indemnity, he would make a
simple plea: “Tell me the bad news.”2 But despite their best e orts,
his underwriters were repeatedly overly optimistic in estimating
losses.3
In 1982—in e ect, acknowledging his failure to manage the
business—Bu ett had asked Michael Goldberg, a thirty-six-year-old
former McKinsey & Co. consultant who had been at Berkshire a
couple of years, to run the insurance group. Goldberg was the
exception to Bu ett’s far- ung managers; he worked in the

adjacent o ce in Kiewit Plaza. If anyone was suited for this
impersonal terrain, it was Goldberg. As Goldberg said, Bu ett was
looking for “people with no ego.” Goldberg t the bill.
A thin, intense New Yorker, Goldberg was physically evocative
of Woody Allen. A colleague said it wouldn’t have surprised him if
Goldberg’s IQ was 180. But, as a graduate of the elite Bronx High
School of Science, he was used to being around smarter people
still. From Bu ett’s angle, his virtue was that he was even more
allergic to risk than Bu ett. A worrywart who lived for his work,
Goldberg drove a dilapidated Oldsmobile that was so banged up
that a subordinate once tore his coat on the chrome.4 At the time,
Goldberg’s bonus was $2 million. He and his wife, who were
childless, lived in a modest duplex not far from Bu ett’s home.
However, he and Bu ett rarely socialized.
Their relationship was strictly insurance. Bu ett liked to kick
around mathematical puzzles with Goldberg (always in Goldberg’s
o ce, so that Bu ett was free to leave when he wanted). And
Goldberg occasionally took policies to Bu ett to get his okay. But
Bu ett made it clear that he didn’t want to spend a lot of time
answering questions.5 What he did do was provide Goldberg’s
group with a strong sense of direction.
Berkshire’s favored (but not exclusive) niche was “reinsurance.”
This in e ect is a wholesale business. Instead of selling thousands
of small policies to homeowners or drivers, the reinsurer sells a few
very big policies to other insurance companies, thus assuming a
portion of the risks that its customers have underwritten. It is
typically a “long-tail” business, meaning that claims are slow to
develop. Thus, a reinsurer can reinvest the “ oat” from premium
payments over long periods, only at the end of which will its pro t
(or loss) be known. It is hardly surprising that many reinsurers err
toward optimism. Bu ett put it rather wittily:
Initially, the morning mail brings lots of cash and few claims. This state of a airs can
produce a blissful, almost euphoric, feeling akin to that experienced by an innocent
upon receipt of his rst credit card.6

The perennial problem is competition. As Bu ett noted, all it
took to increase the “supply” of insurance (unlike that of physical
commodities) was the willingness of a provider to sign its name.7
Therefore, when prices were high, new entrants rushed in. This led
to frequent, cyclical bouts of price-cutting. The rst half of the
eighties was one such period, with woefully inadequate prices.
Bu ett’s response to the slump, though, was unlike anyone else’s.
As Bu ett liked to relate the business to poker, it is illustrative to
consider his response to an actual wagering proposition. Every
other year, he got together with Tom Murphy, Charlie Munger, and
some other pals for a golf and bridge weekend in Pebble Beach,
California. The men did a lot of betting, and at one session, in the
early eighties, Jack Byrne, the GEICO chairman, proposed a novel
side bet. For a “premium” of $11, Byrne would agree to pay
$10,000 to anyone who hit a hole-in-one over the weekend.
Everyone reached for the cash—everyone, that is, except for
Bu ett, who coolly calculated that, given the odds, $11 was too
high a premium. His pals could not believe that he—by then,
almost a billionaire—would be so tight and began to razz him for
it. Bu ett, grinning, noted that he measured an $11 wager exactly
as he would $11 million. He kept his wallet zipped.8
Now, cut to insurance. While other companies cut prices to hang
on to market share, Bu ett recognized this as betting against the
odds. So he and Goldberg refused to play. From 1980 to 1984, they
allowed their business to shrink from $185 million in premiums to
$134 million. If the business was unpro table, Bu ett didn’t want
the business. Someday—he wrote this in 1982—losses would force
providers to pull back, and prices would rise. In the meantime, he
would wait.
It is natural to wonder why every insurer didn’t adopt such an
approach. Their shareholders, and their managements, had been
schooled on the principle of “steady” growth. To turn down
business would violate the culture. At Berkshire, insurance
operatives responded to a very di erent imperative. (In insurance,
Berkshire did have a “culture.”) Constantine Iordanou, a division
president in New York, said that when he wrote a policy, he was

quite conscious that he was playing, as he put it, “with Warren’s
checkbook.” This tended to inhibit Iordanou from betting against
the odds.
In 1985, the insurance market did turn. The industry su ered
severe losses and insolvencies, and many companies cut back the
coverage they o ered. The ability to provide insurance, in Bu ett’s
phrase, is “an attitudinal concept, not a physical fact.”9 By 1985,
both the “attitude” of insurers and their capital reserves were
depressed, and prices soared.
Bu ett now reaped a double payo for his prior conservatism.
Big commercial customers realized that a promise from a
potentially insolvent provider is no promise at all. There was a
ight to quality, and Berkshire, which had six times as much as
capital as the average carrier, had the soundest balance sheet of
any insurer in the country.10 Thus, just as prices became attractive,
Berkshire was very much in demand.
In mid-1985, Bu ett took out a nervy advertisement inviting big
commercial customers (who were hard pressed to nd coverage) to
submit policies for any type of risk with premiums of $1 million or
more. There was a twist: respondents had to name their price. If
Bu ett (or Goldberg) deemed a proposal to be unreasonable, he
would throw it out with the understanding that he would not grant
a second chance. This poker ploy generated more than $100
million in premiums.
The strong-get-stronger scenario was even more pronounced in
reinsurance. With their losses mounting, conventional insurers
were scrambling for protective cover. But reinsurers, too, had been
burned by losses. Few were able to answer the call, and fewer still
were willing. Having lost money when prices were low, they were
fearful of writing coverage at any price. Bu ett likened them to
Mark Twain’s cat: “Having once sat on a hot stove, it never did so
again—but it never again sat on a cold stove, either.”11
Berkshire was now in a position to write very big policies, thanks
to its capital and to Bu ett’s “attitude.” He was perfectly willing to
risk losing large amounts of money, even as much as $10 million
on a single event such as a re or earthquake, as long as the odds—

the prices-were favorable. In the 1985 letter, one can hear him
gloating: “Now the tables are turned: we have the underwriting
capability whereas others do not.”12 In 1986, Berkshire’s premiums
soared to $1 billion, seven times the level of two years earlier.13
This translated to $800 million of “ oat” (dollars available for
reinvestment), and to more than $1 billion the following year.
By 1987, Berkshire was stu ed with cash. However, it was far
from clear what Bu ett would do with it. He would “rather buy a
good stock than a good jet,”14 he quipped, but he could not nd
one that was cheap enough. The bull market was in its heyday. In
the spring, when Berkshire staged its annual meeting, the Dow was
at an eye-opening 2,258 (and Berkshire at $3,450 a share). Bu ett
had quietly sold every stock in the portfolio save for the
“permanent” three: Cap Cities, GEICO, and Washington Post. But
he was stumped for a place to reinvest.
Bu ett mistrusted forecasts—as he reminded shareholders, Ben
Graham had been bearish when the Dow was at 400. But Bu ett
could not suppress his pessimism; in response to a question, he said
he would not be surprised if the market—then at a precarious
twenty times earnings—fell 50 percent. Share prices had lately
been rising at a far, far faster clip than the 12 to 13 percent equity
“coupon” that companies were actually earning. To Bu ett, this
suggested “a danger zone.”
A shareholder with a long memory asked if the climate
resembled that of 1969, when Bu ett had folded Bu ett
Partnership. At that time, Bu ett recalled, “Opportunities were not
available. I shoved the bottle away and returned the capital to my
partners.”15 But now he could not cork the bottle; Berkshire’s
operating subsidiaries—insurance, Mrs. B, et al.—continued to feed
him cash. Bu ett needed a place to put it.
Throughout the spring and summer, the stock market rally
continued. In July, the Dow hit 2,500; in August: 2,700. There were
snickers from the bulls; those, such as Bu ett, who were on the
sidelines were missing the rally of the century. Shares of Berkshire
touched a new high—$4,270 a share. It hardly mattered. As in
1969, Bu ett was shoveling money into municipal bonds.16 He had

no decent alternative. Then he got a call from John Gutfreund, the
chief of Salomon Brothers.
Since the bailout of GEICO a decade earlier, Gutfreund and
Bu ett had been in increasing touch.17 Lonely at the top,
Gutfreund often called Bu ett for advice. Bu ett, in turn, admired
Gutfreund as a cut above the average investment banker. Though
known for his scalding sarcasm, Gutfreund was conservative in his
approach to business. He had refused to let Salomon underwrite
junk bonds and had generally avoided hostile raids, despite the
lucrative fees associated with each. Instead, the
rm had
concentrated on trading. To Charlie Munger, Gutfreund evoked all
that was noble in Salomon’s tribal culture, particularly its
willingness to lay its capital on the line. He had a grandeur that
the newer breed of executive lacked.
During the summer, Bu ett had mentioned that he might be
interested in buying stock if Salomon’s shares got cheaper.18
Though the stock had dropped by a third, it wasn’t at Bu ett’s level
yet. But the business was having trouble.
And Salomon’s biggest shareholder, Minerals and Resources
Corp., or Minorco, was making restive noises. Minorco, controlled
by South Africa’s Harry Oppenheimer, had retained Felix Rohatyn,
the investment banker, who had let it be known that Minorco was
anxious to sell. Though Minorco was sitting on 14 percent of his
company, Gutfreund had let the matter drift—a fatal habit. Then,
in mid-September, he learned that Rohatyn had found a potential
buyer. Gutfreund was stunned to learn the buyer’s identity: Ronald
Perelman’s Revlon.
Gutfreund had recently given in to his bankers and agreed to let
Salomon enter the takeover business. How little he had suspected
that he could be a target was evident from his breezy performance,
earlier that year, in a roundtable on takeovers with Boone Pickens,
merger lawyer Joe Flom, Drexel CEO Fred Joseph, prosecutor
Rudolph Giuliani, raider Sir James Goldsmith, and Bu ett.19 The
moderator, Lewis Kaden, had conjured up the image of “Harry,” a
typical, old-fashioned CEO, dedicated to building long-term values,

who is suddenly threatened by a raider.
: Let’s not waste a lot of time on Harry.

GUTFREUND

MODERATOR

:

:

GUTFREUND

MODERATOR

[adopting the role of Harry]: What do you mean? I
invented this company in my backyard.
You did a wonderful job. You were great in your time.
Sorry, that’s life. The board will throw him out.

: Is that fair, to throw him out?
Fairness has nothing to do with it. There is no way you

:

GUTFREUND

can turn the clock back. Now whether management is
improved and does its own job or whether it’s taken over
by somebody else … Harry is gone.

Now, when Gutfreund looked in the mirror, “Harry” stared back.
Gutfreund agreed to meet Perelman, who assured him that his
intentions were “friendly” and that he would want Gutfreund to
stay. However, Perelman added that he would want two seats on
the board and intimated that he might buy up to 25 percent of the
stock. Gutfreund was cool.20
Gutfreund’s supporting cast at Salomon was quick to note that
Perelman was being represented by Bruce Wasserstein and feared
that if Perelman won control, “Bruce” would soon be in charge.21
Perelman sco ed at the idea that he would spend his own money
to get Wasserstein a job. He maintained, in an interview, that his
motive was misunderstood. However, he was vague about what his
motive was, beyond a general appreciation for Salomon’s business.
In any case, Gutfreund didn’t trust him, and neither did Salomon’s
brass.22 “They viewed him as Attila the Hun,” Rohatyn noted.
Perelman was then in the midst of a second, very unfriendly raid
on Gillette, from which he had already extracted greenmail.23

Martin Leibowitz, Salomon’s house mathematician, said, “People
couldn’t have worked for Perelman. It was not who we were.”
Alas, it was late in the day for such high-mindedness. Minorco
would sell to the rst bidder that o ered it a premium. Salomon
could not itself a ord to buy the block, and Perelman was ready to
pay $38 a share (the market price was in the low 30s), or roughly
$700 million. This was early in the week of Monday, September
21. Rohatyn gured that Salomon had until the weekend to nd
another investor. Gutfreund called Omaha.
Bu ett arranged to meet Gutfreund and Gerald Rosenfeld,
Salomon’s chief nancial o cer, a night or two later in New York,
at the o ce of lawyer Marty Lipton, Gutfreund’s adviser. Bu ett
loped in tout seul, with a newspaper under his arm, in a white-andblue seersucker, the lining of which was torn. Seeing his slouched
frame, Rosenfeld drew a breath: this was Salomon’s savior?24
Bu ett and Gutfreund went o by themselves to feel each other
out. After half an hour, Rosenfeld joined them, and Bu ett began
to ask him about Salomon’s prospects, including where he thought
the stock would be in ve years. While they both agreed that the
mid-6os was a likely number, Bu ett thought Salomon too dicey for
him to buy the common stocks.25 However, he was willing to invest
in a “convertible preferred,” as long as Berkshire could expect to
make an after-tax annual pro t of 15 percent. As they talked, it
became clear that Bu ett had the terms of such an issue in mind.
Convertibles are the half-breeds of Wall Street. They have
attributes of a bond: a xed coupon and security of principal. They
also enable a holder to convert to common stock. They are aptly
described as Treasury bills with a lottery ticket attached. The
holder has a safe investment and a chance to make a killing—
though not as big a pro t as on ordinary common.
Bu ett insisted that Berkshire get a 9 percent coupon and a pair
of seats on Salomon’s board—one for him, one for Munger.
Salomon’s senior managers had a heated discussion over the terms,
which they thought far too sweet for Bu ett. “The feeling was, it
had a very small premium [the conversion price was $38] and a
very high dividend. Warren had it both ways,” William Mcintosh,

the head of Salomon’s Chicago o ce, recalled. As a bonus,
Berkshire’s $63-million-a-year dividend (like all such payments
received by corporations) would be mostly tax-exempt. On the
other hand, Bu ett’s capital would enable Salomon to buy out
Minorco at a premium—and rid it of the threat from Perelman. In
the minds of Salomon’s executives, the choice between Perelman
and Bu ett was no choice at all.26
On Saturday evening, Gutfreund met Perelman again, for a
drink at the swank Hotel Plaza Athenée on the Upper East Side.
This time Gutfreund declared, politely but bluntly, that Perelman
would not be welcome as an investor.27 Two days later, the
o ended Perelman indicated that he would accept the same
security as Bu ett, and with less attractive terms—but threatened,
if he was rejected, to buy a controlling stake on the open market.28
Once again, Gutfreund snubbed him.
Then Gutfreund told his directors that they could either approve
the Bu ett deal, which would make Berkshire Salomon’s biggest
shareholder, or nd a new CEO.29 Prophetically, Gutfreund argued
that Bu ett would be a help to him in running the company. One
director, Maurice Greenberg, strenuously objected,30 but the board
went along. The only rationale for this rather expensive deal was
the uncertain premise that somehow, down the road, Salomon
would be better o with Bu ett in control than Perelman.
When the news broke, in late September, Wall Street was
stunned. The Wall Street Journal commented: “All the players
seemed to t-except one.”31 Bu ett was putting $700 million—his
biggest bet ever—into a rm of traders. His respect for Gutfreund
gured heavily. “Charlie and I like, admire and trust John,”32
Bu ett noted soon after. Moreover, the form of the security seemed
safe. Ace Greenberg, the streetwise CEO of Bear Stearns, thought
Bu ett had made “a great deal for the shareholders of Berkshire
Hathaway.” If Gutfreund had given away the store, that was his
problem.
Still, Bu ett took some heat. Forbes’s Allan Sloan pointed out
that Bu ett’s nancing had enabled Salomon to pay greenmail to
Minorco.33 And Bu ett’s fans felt let down that Bu ett had joined

forces with Wall Street. A year earlier, he had disdainfully written
that if a graduating M.B.A. had asked him how to get rich in a
hurry, he would have held his nose with one hand and pointed to
Wall Street with the other.34 Now, even the stalwart Carol Loomis
was moved to write in Fortune:
The most fascinating aspect of Bu ett’s Salomon investment is that it puts him in bed
with Wall Streeters, whose general greed he has scorned in the past. 35

It was soon apparent that Bu ett had badly misjudged the
business. As an important and well-treated customer of Salomon’s,
he had an overly rosy view of it. Two weeks after the deal,
Salomon disclosed that it would lay o eight hundred employees
and fold two departments, moves that would cost it $67 million.
There was a sense that Gutfreund was not in control. And this was
echoed by a sudden and general nervousness in stock and bond
markets.
For ve glorious years, the bull market had roared. Though
interest rates had risen through most of 1987 (depressing intrinsic
business values), the stock market had ignored them. By August,
stock prices were at the historically unsustainable level of twentytwo times earnings.
As each lunatic has his vision, each bull market has its rationale.
In 1987, it was that excess “liquidity” would hold prices up. This
was a version of the greater-fool theory: the cash (“liquidity”) of
nameless others would save the day. Japanese stocks, then at sixty
times earnings, were said to provide cover. No matter how absurd
the prices at home, since Japanese stocks were more absurd, U.S.
stocks were held to be safe. Of course, such rationales had not kept
previous rallies from abrupt and unpleasant endings. But a bull
market is a bit like falling in love. When you are in one, it has
never happened to anyone before.
Binkley C. Shorts, a senior vice president of Wellington
Management, was representative of the pack. Shorts had a
Harvard M.B.A., three kids, and a nger on the pulse of Wall

Street. He acknowledged that stocks were rich, but was strong of
heart:
Foreign money’s attracted to our market because it’s less expensive than their own. So
maybe the market can go up regardless of fundamentals.36

No one disputed that prices were high, but the bull market had
become an article of faith. Business Week suggested that
“yesterday’s yardsticks” were no longer apt.37 Bu ett felt that
money managers were not using any yardstick. They had
abandoned the e ort to value stocks at all: “For them, stocks are
merely tokens in a game, like the thimble and atiron in
Monopoly.”38
With computerized trading, fund managers were now buying
groups of stocks by the bucketful in market “baskets”—a few
million GM, a couple of million AT&T, and a dab of Westinghouse,
on rye, please. A parallel trend was the emergence of stock-index
futures in the commodity pits in Chicago. These new futures
contracts, which traded next to pork bellies and cattle, enabled
speculators to bet on the direction of the entire stock market. To a
Graham-and-Dodd investor, of course, a stock derived its value
from the underlying, individual business. But the new breed of
“investor,” who was buying the market whole, did not even know
which stocks he owned. Security analysis was irrelevant.
On Wall Street, if not in Omaha, “asset allocation” was the
rage.39 Instead of looking for individual issues, the portfolio
manager rst decided how much to invest in “stocks,” treating
them as a generic class. The total could be and was continually
rejiggled, resulting in sudden wholesale shifts. As an o shoot,
managers were letting computer models in uence and even make
their buy-sell decisions. Prophetically, Institutional Investor warned
in September 1987 of the “false sense of security” from relying on
technological masters.40
But few paid notice. “Portfolio insurance,” a high-tech nostrum
for fund managers, was said to be a fail-safe. Under this strategy,
managers determined in advance to automatically sell increasing

amounts of stock-index futures whenever markets fell. The theory
was that futures could be sold more readily than stocks. By quickly
selling futures, portfolio managers would hope to cut their losses
before a drop became severe.
V. Kent Green, an investment adviser at First Bank System in
Minneapolis, noted that when one wanted to sell, “some of your
stock positions could be very illiquid”—meaning that no one would
be around to buy them. But Green was sleeping soundly; if the
need arose, he could get out by the side door, in Chicago.
“Futures,” he noted, “are about four times more liquid than stocks
at the current time.”41
What escaped Green’s attention was that he did not need to sell
futures “at the current time”; he would need to sell when markets
tumbled—when, presumably, everyone else would be selling, too.
When the hour came, according to a subsequent White House
study, chaired by investment banker Nicholas F. Brady, some $60
billion to $90 billion of futures were poised on the same delicate
trigger as Green’s.42
In retrospect, what was memorable about October was not its
suddenness, but the degree to which it had been advertised in
advance. Cassandras abounded. Charles Allmon, a newsletter
writer, had talked of “a huge debacle of the magnitude we saw in
1929.”43 The bears knew that prices were high; the bulls knew it,
too. But everyone wanted the last drink. From January 1 to the
August peak of 2,722.4, the Dow rose an astonishing 44 percent.
The refrain was maddening. Byron R. Wien, investment strategist
at Morgan Stanley and one of Wall Street’s most-watched beacons,
was ready to throw away the rule book. Even bad news, he
suggested in August, might send stocks higher:
… some profoundly mysterious forces have enabled the market to advance.… So

perhaps the link between reality and stock prices isn’t as tight as they taught us in
business school.44

Alas, within a week or so, reality showed its face. There were
hints of in ation, a naggingly stubborn trade de cit, and a

worrying drop in the dollar. The Federal Reserve, hoping to stem
in ation fears and to prop up the dollar, ushered in Labor Day by
hiking the discount rate, the widely watched rate at which the Fed
lends money to banks. Bond markets, taking their cue, went into a
tumble. The stock market gave back 38 points in a day.
By early October, the yield on long-term bonds had risen to
nearly 10 percent—up from only 7.4 percent as recently as March.
On October 6, the Dow plunged 91.55 points, a one-day record.
Markets had entered the vaporous territory in which events take
on a life of their own and historical accidents may occur. In short,
things were becoming serious.
On about October 12, Bu ett cashed out the stock portfolio of at
least one of Berkshire’s pro t-sharing plans. It cleaned the larder
of stocks, save for his permanent three. According to a Bu ett
associate, “It was a clear edict: ‘Sell everything.’ ”
Bu ett was not making a forecast; he was merely obeying two
cherished rules. Rule No. 1: “Never lose money.” Rule No. 2: “Never
forget Rule No. 1.” Munger said, “Warren would never claim that
he could call the market.” But perhaps Bu ett had been glancing a
bit more anxiously at the newspaper clipping on his wall—the one
from 1929. In the week following, interest rates climbed above 10
percent. Japanese shares continued to rise, but now no one on
Wall Street cared about Japan. On Friday, October 16, the Dow
plunged 108 points.
Washington was on edge. Whenever markets failed, bureaucrats
could be counted on to look for a culprit outside their ken—
speculators, the gnomes of Zurich, whomever. An o cial
resentfully blamed the fall on “twenty-nine-year-old technicians.”45
The Treasury Secretary, more mindful of appearances, told a
weekend television audience that he did not expect further
tightening from the Fed. But it was too late.
On Monday, October 19, sell orders jammed the market. Eleven
of the thirty stocks in the Dow average could not open during the
rst hour of trading.46 In the interim, portfolio insurance sell
programs had been triggered automatically. The futures market
went into free fall, which, of course, touched o a sympathetic

drop in stocks.47 In the end, it did matter where the selling
occurred. The door was too small to admit everyone through, and
the vaunted portfolio insurance failed to save the day. By late
afternoon, the panic had become a rout.
In Boston, people lined up outside Fidelity Investments to
redeem shares. Newspapers spoke of “hysteria.”48 But the New
York nancial district was quieter than usual. People were indoors,
tethered to electronic screens. Black Monday may have been the
rst postmodern historic event; it seemed not to have a tangible
center. The Dow fell 508 points, or 22.6 percent.
Bu ett’s net worth dropped by $342 million. He must have been
one of the few investment people in America who did not have a
minute-by-minute account of the crash. At one point, Bu ett went
into Mike Goldberg’s o ce and calmly told him where Berkshire
was trading. Then he went back to his desk.
Two days later, Bu ett’s Graham group convened in
Williamsburg, Virginia. The market was still turbulent, but the
group was curiously detached. No one left the seminar room to
check on prices or even spoke much of them. They toured a
plantation under a resplendent fall sky, admiring the foliage.
Wyndham Robertson, a university administrator and journalist in
the group, asked Bu ett what the crash had “meant.” All he could
say was “Maybe the market had gotten too high.”
Compared with Black Thursday, the great collapse of 1929, Black
Monday was oddly hollow. No depression or other economic tide
followed in its wake. At rst it was thought that the crash would
prove a socioeconomic milestone. Columnists cheered the end of
the casino era, and especially of the nouveau riche captains of
investment banking. But after a brief pause, Wall Street rolled on.
Indeed, in 1988, bankers would cut more deals than ever, and
stocks would recoup most of their lost ground. The crash seemed to
leave no footprint, save for the jagged slant on the screens of
traders.
Its “meaning” was evident only on a small scale. A week before
the fall, Berkshire had traded at $4,230 a share. On Friday the
16th, it closed at $3,890. In the madness of Monday, it fell to

$3,170. Berkshire had been worth close to $5 billion, laboriously
built up over twenty-two years. Nothing in the company had
changed: Stan Lipsey sold the same number of papers in Bu alo;
World Book was nestled, as ever, on pupils’ shelves. Yet in the
space of a week, 25 percent of the company’s market value had
been wiped out. A quarter of the fruits of a generation’s work had
vanished. Something was wrong.

Chapter 17

A BRIEF INTRODUCTION TO DARTS

Without due recognition of crowd-thinking (which often seems crowdmadness) our theories of economics leave much to be desired.
BERNARD BARUCH

Ben Graham had likened the behavior of stocks to that of a kindly
but ckle fellow named Mr. Market. Now manic, now depressive,
Mr. Market’s next quotation was anybody’s guess. The trick for the
investor was to ignore his unpredictable mood changes. But on
October 19, 1987, investors had fallen dumbly under his spell,
selling stocks—any stocks—tick for miserable tick.
This proved to Bu ett what he had already known—that Graham
had been abandoned. He had been shelved for academic “witch
doctors” who peddled “arcane formulae” and “techniques shrouded
in mystery.” Though “Ben’s allegory” was a
tting-as-ever
prophylactic against the “super-contagious emotions that swirl
about the marketplace,” scarcely a business school in the country
used Graham’s texts. Instead of price and value, Bu ett lamented
in a postmortem, “professionals and academicians talk of e cient
markets, dynamic hedging and betas.”1

The crash had exposed Wall Street along its intellectual seam,
but the debate had been festering there for decades. Since the
sixties, Graham-and-Dodd investors, led by Bu ett, had been
waging a war with modern nancial theorists. Oddly, the most
successful investor of the age, and perhaps ever, had come to be
belittled and ignored by the foremost scholars in his eld. The
monks of nance had shunned him as a heretic, while in Bu ett’s
eyes, these abbots and friars were engaged in an incestuous e ort
to prove, with ever greater elegance and seeming precision, that
the earth, indeed, was truly at.
The premise of Bu ett’s career was that stockpicking, though
di cult and subjective, was susceptible to reasoned analysis.
Occasionally, certain stocks sold for far less than they were
“worth.” An astute investor could pro t by buying them.
In place of that rather modest maxim, scholars had substituted a
seductively simple but unifying design, the E cient Market
Theory. In a nutshell, the theory said that at any moment, all the
publicly available information about a company was re ected in
the price of its stock. Whenever news about a stock became public,
traders pounced, buying or selling until its price reached
equilibrium. Underlying this truism was an assumption that the old
price had been as “wise” as traders could make it. Therefore, the
new price—and each succeeding new price—would be wise as
well. The traders merely did the work of Adam Smith’s Invisible
Hand.
Since everything worth knowing about a company was already
in the price, most security analysis was, to cite a popular text,
“logically incomplete and valueless.”2 The future course of a stock
would depend on new (as yet unknowable) information. A stock,
then, was unpredictable; it followed a “random walk.”
If markets were random, investing was a game of chance.
Bu ett, then, was a lucky investor but not a skillful one, just as the
person who repeatedly got heads when ipping a coin was a lucky
—not a skillful- ipper. This challenged nothing less than the
validity of Bu ett’s career.

Bu ett’s record also posed a challenge, for it was the
inconvenient fact that failed to follow the form. Bu ett would
taunt the scholars with the evidence of his career, and implicit in
his taunts was a simple question: “If you’re so smart, how come I’m
so rich?”
Nonetheless, at business schools and economics departments, the
E cient Market Theory acquired the power of sacrament. Its truths
were regarded as absolute, whereas competing doctrines were
virtually banned. The theory also permeated Wall Street, as well as
the investing culture as received in nancial talk shows and advice
columns. It is, indeed, the intellectual basis for the eggs-in-athousand-baskets approach of extreme “diversi cation,” which is
the prevailing bias of most investors today.
The theory fermented at various sites, but from similar yeasts,
during the 1950s and 1960s. Among the pioneers was Paul A.
Samuelson, the popular Massachusetts Institute of Technology
economist and textbook writer. Samuelson was a Keynesian, but
where the sardonic Lord Keynes viewed the stock exchange as a
casino, Samuelson put faith in market prices. Around 1950,
Samuelson subscribed to a tip sheet that charged $125 a year. He
soon decided, logically enough, that if the tout service had really
“known,” it would have charged far more than $125 or kept its tips
to itself.3 This was a forerunner of the E cient Market Theorist’s
joke in which two economists, walking across a campus, spot a $10
bill on the ground. As one bends to retrieve it, the other says,
“Don’t bother. If it were really worth $10, it wouldn’t be there.”
Samuelson’s landmark “Proof That Properly Anticipated Prices
Fluctuate Randomly,” published in 1965, adorned this notion in
scholarly cloth. His intriguing gambit was that future events “cast
their shadows before them”—that is, they are re ected in current
prices.
If one could be sure that a price will rise, it would have already risen.… You never get
something for nothing.4

Two years later, Samuelson appeared before the Senate committee
looking into mutual funds. As noted, funds of the Go-Go era were
charging exorbitant fees, yet it was hard to see that their managers
merited any fee at all. The typical fund did not even beat the
market averages. As Samuelson explained it, “intelligent people”
were “constantly shopping around for good value,” buying bargain
stocks and selling dear ones and, in the process, eliminating such
opportunities even as they arose.5 The funds’ records were such
that they could have done as well throwing darts. John Sparkman,
the committee chairman, was stunned. Did Samuelson say darts?
What my report says is that the median fund
having access to this high-paid management
MR. SAMUELSON

:

has, in fact, done just as well and no better
than twenty random stocks selected from the
stock market.
When you say twenty random stocks, are you

THE CHAIRMAN

:

referring to stocks that you just close your
eyes and reach down and touch?

MR. SAMUELSON

THE CHAIRMAN

:

:

Yes. Precisely.
Or is some expert economist such as you
picking them?
No. Random. When I say “random,” I want

MR. SAMUELSON

:

you to think of dice or think of random
numbers or a dart.

The professor, however, did not advocate using darts to pick
investments. For one thing, he knew, the E cient Market Theory
had some problems. Stock prices were far more volatile than the
expected cash ows of the underlying companies, of which they

were, in theory, a mirror. And Samuelson was corresponding with
Conrad Ta , the Graham student and early Bu ett devotee, who
insisted that the theory was bunk. Bu ett, who actually had a
dartboard in his o ce for a while,6 was beating the darts every
year, Ta would tell him. Samuelson was intrigued, and gradually
became a “Warren watcher,”7 the rst of many E cient Market
Theorists who puzzled over Bu ett rather as an astronomer might
wonder about a mysterious star.
But Samuelson did not change his mind. Part of the theory’s
allure was that it extended the classical economics of Adam Smith
to nancial markets. Investors such as Bu ett thought of intrinsic
value as an inherent quality; it lay “behind, or beneath, the prices
observed in the marketplace.”8 The prices themselves were
approximations. But to a classicist, the Invisible Hand was
perpetually driving market prices and value together. In the
extreme view, value only emerged—in a sense, only existed—at
the point when buyer and seller agreed on a price. If IBM was
trading at $120 a share, then IBM was “worth” $120; it could not
be more or less. Of course, this implied that the buyer and seller
were acting rationally.
Bu ett’s view, of companies and of human behavior, was more
circumspect. In the rst place, value was not so precise; another
also rational investor might value IBM at $130. More to the point,
investors were not always rational. At times, and especially under
the in uence of crowd psychology, investors might pay $160 for
IBM—or agree to sell it for only $80.
The E cient Market Theory had, in fact, begun as an attempt to
debunk an aspect of the market’s irrationality. From the time of
Graham, Wall Street had peddled the work of so-called technical
analysts. By gazing into charts of previous prices, these would-be
Merlins deigned to predict the future. Their lexicon was widely
adopted; thus, commentators would speak of a stock’s “testing a
crucial barrier,” which in fact was not a barrier but an inferred line
on a chart. The E cient Market Theorists exposed the chartists as
frauds or, as the University of Chicago economist Eugene F. Fama
put it, “astrologers.”9 The price “patterns” were patterns only in

retrospect; no one could tell, looking at a chart, whether a stock
that had fallen 10 percent would rebound or fall by 10 percent
more. (For reasons known only to themselves, Merrill Lynch,
Morgan Stanley, Salomon Brothers, and the rest continue to
employ such soothsayers down to this day.)
But the theorists replaced the chartist voodoo with a voodoo of
their own. They defused the idea that prices foretold the future, but
ascribed to those same prices an unerring appraisal of the present.
Prices, that is, were never wrong. They incorporated, with as much
perfection as humans could manage, all there was to know of a
company’s long-term prospects. Studying those prospects was
therefore pointless. Thus, the theorists’ attack spread from the
chartists to “fundamental analysts,” such as Bu ett, who combed
through corporate reports looking for undervalued stocks. Quoting
Fama:
If the random walk theory is valid and if security exchanges are “e cient” markets,
then stock prices at any point in time will represent good estimates of intrinsic or

fundamental values. Thus, additional fundamental analysis is of value only when the
analyst has new information … or has new insights concerning the e ects of generally
available information.…10

Taken at face, the quali er o ered a gaping loophole.
Obviously, the analyst with neither new information nor new
insights did not have an edge. But the rogue phrase “new
information” was not to be taken at face. The implication was that
investors with superior records must have had inside dope, or at
least dope that was not widely known. Thus, the theory was intact:
not even a perfect market could be expected to digest information
before it was public. Indeed, the Economist, which reported each
twist and turn of the theorists as received wisdom, asserted that
stockpicking smarts were “either rare or nonexistent,” although,
the magazine sneered, “it helps to have the kind of inside
smartness that Ivan Boesky had.”11 Samuelson was explicit:

In the same way, experience has persuaded me that there are a few Warren Bu etts
out there with high rent-earning ability because they are good at guring out which

fundamentals are fundamental and which new data are worth paying high costs to get.

Such super-stars don’t come cheap: by the time you spot them their fee has been bid
sky high!12

As Samuelson knew, Bu ett did not charge a fee. In any event,
Bu ett got his “data” chie y from annual reports, which were
available to anyone. By ignoring this, Samuelson could attribute
Bu ett’s success to information-gathering, and thus avoid the issue
of whether Bu ett might have a talent for analyzing the “data.” It
was as if he were merely a good librarian.
But Samuelson, a Nobel laureate in economics, knew he was
more than that. At some point after his Senate testimony,
Samuelson bought a big stake in Berkshire Hathaway,13 a just-incase hedging reminiscent of Voltaire’s deathbed acceptance of the
Church. Samuelson declined to comment, but he was hardly alone.
Armen A. Alchian, a noted economist at the University of
California at Los Angeles, also invested in Berkshire. Yet Alchian,
in a letter to a fellow economist, maintained:
I remain convinced that no investment funds, no matter for what kind of new activity

or area, can claim demonstrable superior talent. Luck, Yes. But Superior Talent, No.…
No, it’s a world in which all reliably predictable events are priced right, with only
surprise left. And surprise is “random” by de nition.14

But Alchian devoted considerable energy to explaining Bu ett’s
results. Ultimately, he decided that the secret lay in a wrinkle in
Nebraska insurance law that, according to Alchian, permitted
Nebraska insurers to take a greater role in monitoring their
investments than out-of-state insurers.
I attribute his success entirely to that fortunate, happenstance position, and not to any
superior (relative to his competitors) skills.

It is di cult not to marvel at Alchian’s leap of faith. Samuelson at
least allowed that “Warren may be as near to a genius at investing
as I have observed.”15 Yet that was also a sort of damnation.
Genius was not method—and Samuelson disclaimed his method.
“Warren gave a talk and said, ‘Any fool could see that the
Washington Post was under priced,’ ” Samuelson noted. “I’m not a
fool. I don’t nd it credible.” Why, then, had Bu ett bought the
Post? Samuelson replied, “That’s the di erence between genius and
talent.” As a genius—a sort of freak—Bu ett could be dismissed.
The E cient Market Theory would still hold true for mortals. Thus,
Stanford’s William F. Sharpe wrote Bu ett o as a “three-sigma
event”—a statistical aberration so out of line as to require no
further attention.
From the foundation of the E cient Market Theory, scholars
erected the elaborate construct of modern nance. Finance is the
inverse of investing; it describes the capital-raising function from
the corporate point of view. It is a useful discipline, but inexact.
But now, like investing, nance was seen as a quanti able social
science, far more precise than the actual world it purported to
explain. One theorist depicted a formula for a stock’s return, R,
with M standing for the market, a and b standing for constants that
may vary from stock to stock, and u signifying a random error:16
R= a + bM + u
The economist hastened to add that this was only a model “in its
simplest form.” There was no shortage of models as impenetrable
as the Dead Sea Scrolls or a verse from the Koran.
This “science” was grounded in the only evidence that scholars
considered relevant: the data of (supposedly perfect) stock prices.
It ignored all of the myriad and changing factors—such as a
company’s strategy, products, market strength, and management—
that are central to valuing a business in the real world. Such
variables are subjective and imprecise; but they are, of course, the
stu that investor-analysts such as Bu ett reckon with every day.

One might have imagined that a few business schools might have
turned to Bu ett’s reports, at least as a guide, in discussing such
topics. But save for an occasional guest lecture, Bu ett was a
nonperson in academia. This hit him in a sensitive spot. While
most investors are content to make the money, Bu ett very much
wanted recognition for being right. It was important to Bu ett,
ever the teacher, that Graham—and Bu ett—be seen as a useful
model. Quoting from a letter:
In my opinion, the continuous 63-year arbitrage experience of Graham-Newman
Corp., Bu ett Partnership, and Berkshire illustrates just how foolish EMT is.… the

three organizations traded hundreds of di erent securities … we did not have to dig
for obscure facts … we simply acted on highly-publicized events.…17

In what for Bu ett must have been an excruciating defection,
Graham himself, near the end of his life, voiced strong doubts
about whether, given the growing abundance of stock research,
security analysis would still pay o . Shortly before his death, in
1976, Graham told an interviewer:
I am no longer an advocate of elaborate techniques of security analysis in order to nd

superior value opportunities. This was a rewarding activity, say, 40 years ago, when
our textbook “Graham & Dodd” was rst published; but the situation has changed.…
18

Since Graham had also attacked the “random walk,” and
speci cally the notion of e cient prices, only six months before,19
the best that one may surmise is that he continued to recognize
ine ciency in a theoretical sense, but doubted that one could take
advantage of it. Bu ett never alluded to Graham’s semi-apostasy,
but then Bu ett always idealized Graham, and Graham was always
braver as a teacher than as an investor.
In contrast, neither Bu ett nor the campus theologians
entertained any ambiguity. As Bu ett noted, economists treated
the theory as “holy scripture.”20 Richard Brealey and Stewart
Myers’s Principles of Corporate Finance, the most widely used
textbook of recent times, captured the unquestioning spirit. The

authors spoke of the “discovery” of e cient markets as though the
theory had been a natural element awaiting its Marie Curie. Their
claim for it was remarkably sweeping:
In an e cient market you can trust prices. They impound all available information
about the value of each security.21

One wonders how a esh-and-blood trader would react to Brealey
and Myers’s idealized depiction of the stock market. Their traders
were ever calm, their speculators ever dispassionate:
In an e cient market there are no
concerned with the rm’s cash
they are entitled.22

nancial illusions. Investors are unromantically

ows and the portion of those cash

ows to which

Scholars did subject the theory to cross-examination, but in an
entirely trivial sense. They studied various exceptions to the
appearance of random pricing, but these exceptions—so-called
anomalies—were formulaic in nature, such as a pattern of stocks
showing gains in January, or on certain days of the week, or at
smaller companies. The discovery of such a less-than-random
pattern wide enough to leave the theory with a pinprick prompted
cries of scholarly amazement and feverish demands for more such
detailed, arcane studies. Yet in this vast epistemological literature
there were no studies of the “anomaly” that might have left the
theory with a mortal puncture—the consistently superior record of
Bu ett and of others such as Keynes, Graham, John Templeton,
Mario Gabelli, John Ne , and Peter Lynch, to cite only the betterknown names.
The records of such investors were ignored or wished away.
Tony Thomson, an investment manager at Bankers Trust, airily
dismissed Bu ett as a “red herring.” Bu ett’s record signi ed
nothing; absent seventy- ve years of quarterly data, Thomson
argued, one couldn’t “establish” whether he had done it with brains
or luck. “Thus, the jury is out on Mr. Bu et [sic].”23 Burton G.

Malkiel, a Princeton economist, popularized this notion in his bestselling A Random Walk down Wall Street:
But while I believe in the possibility of superior professional investment performance,
I must emphasize that the evidence we have thus far does not support the view that
such competence exists.…24

Malkiel saw no evidence of “competence” beyond that of coinippers able to disguise their luck as talent. “God Almighty,”
Malkiel proclaimed, “does not know the proper price-earnings
multiple for a common stock.”25
This fetching comment introduced a straw man. Graham-andDodders did not claim to know the proper price for a stock. Theirs
was a rough science, at best. What they said was that on occasion a
stock was so out of line that one could leap in without any claim to
precision. Such instances might be rare. Graham-and-Dodd
investors typically owned only a dozen or so stocks from among
the thousands available. But those few could make one rich.
Quoting Bu ett:
Observing correctly that the market was frequently e cient, [EMT adherents] went on
to conclude incorrectly that it was always e cient. The di erence between these
propositions is night and day.26

One striking contrast was in the rival camps’ de nition of “risk.”
Risk, to Bu ett, was the risk of paying more than a business would
prove to be worth. And the range of variables was nearly in nite.
Was a company dependent on too few customers? Did the
chairman drink? Since the sum (or even the number) of such risks
could not be gured with precision, Bu ett looked for companies—
the very few companies—in which the risks seemed tolerable even
allowing for error.
The theorists recognized no such nuances; risk, in their view, was
measurable. Since stock prices were right, they simply assumed
that the foreseeable risks in a business were incorporated in its
price. Every change in outlook was immediately matched by a

change in price. Therefore, the best proxy for the “riskiness” of an
investment was the historical riskiness of its stock. Risk, then,
equaled price volatility. It was de ned in precise mathematical
terms, as the degree to which a stock had bounced around, relative
to each bounce of the market as a whole. As if to sanctify its
algebraic properties, it was christened with a Greek letter, beta. A
stock with a beta of 1.0 bounced around as much as the general
market; one with a beta of 1.2 was quanti ably more volatile, and
one with a beta of 1.5 more volatile still.
The theorists’ logic now proceeded on a dizzying spiral. Investors
did not like risk. Therefore, the investors who bought high-beta
stocks, being ever-rational, must have done so because such stocks
held the prospect of above-average returns—indeed, with returns
that would exceed the norm in precise arithmetic relation to their
betas. Conversely, investors in lower-beta stocks would “pay” for
the past tranquillity of such issues by accepting lower returns.
Indeed, since there could be no free lunch, the only way to
consistently earn a higher pro t was by accepting added “risk”—
that is, higher betas.27 Now the totemic nature of modern nance
begins to emerge. The only factor necessary to calculate the
expected relative return on a stock was its beta. Nothing about the
fundamentals of a company mattered; the one number, beta,
computed from past stock prices, was the only relevant issue.
“What is your beta?” the scholars asked. It was like a mantra. And
Wall Street analysts slavishly paid heed. Virtually every brokerage
in the country required its analysts to assess their stocks in terms of
“betas” and of “risk-adjusted”—meaning “beta-adjusted”—returns.
To Graham,28 and to Bu ett, this was a madness. That a stock
bounced around did not make it risky to a long-term holder. In
fact, beta turned “risk” on its head. Consider that when Bu ett
invested in the Washington Post, the market was valuing the Post
at about $80 million. Had the stock fallen by half before his
purchase, it would have been more volatile—and hence, to an
E cient Market Theorist, “riskier.” Bu ett tartly observed, “I have
never been able to gure out why it’s riskier to buy something at
$40 million than at $80 million.”29

Columbia Business School brought the two sides face to face in
1984, the ftieth anniversary of Graham and Dodd’s textbook.
Bu ett was asked to speak on behalf of Graham-and-Dodders, the
University of Rochester’s Michael C. Jensen for the theorists. A
devout believer, Jensen had written in 1978:
I believe there is no other proposition in economics which has more solid empirical
evidence supporting it than the E cient Market Hypothesis.30

Indeed, he had warned dissenters that the theory was “accepted as
a fact of life, and a scholar who purports to model behavior in a
manner which violates it faces a di cult task of justi cation.”31
Since Jensen’s encyclical, the theory, and particularly the
concept of beta, had come under attack. Now, at Columbia, Uris
Hall was stacked with Bu ett’s fellow investors. Surveying the
crowd, Jensen adopted a gracious tone. He felt “like a turkey must
feel at the beginning of a turkey hunt.”
But the turkey was hard to pin down. First, Jensen made an
absolutist claim: no pro t could be systematically earned from
analyzing public information. Then he gave some ground.
Exceptions had popped up; he seemed to grant that a superior
analyst might exist. Still, he ridiculed the profession in general.
People consulted security analysts, like priests, owing to their
“psychic demand for answers.”
When science responds by saying there is no known answer, or worse yet, there is no

answer, people are not satis ed.… In such circumstances people are perfectly willing
to make up answers, or even to pay others to make them up for then.32

Security analysts, then, were the spiritual descendants of “the
medicine man, mystics, astrologers, gurus.” As opposed to these
pagan stockpickers, Jensen claimed for “science” the E cient
Market Theory. Noting that the “star pupils of Graham and Dodd”
were in attendance, Jensen still claimed that it was hard to tell if
“any” were really superior, due to the well-known “selection-bias
problem.”

If I survey a eld of untalented analysts all of whom are doing nothing but ipping
coins, I expect to see some who have tossed two heads in a row and even some who
have tossed ten heads in a row.

Bu ett could not have asked for a better setup. The failure of
most money managers to do better than coin- ippers had been
invoked at every turn. But on re ection, there was less to this than
met the eye. Since pros accounted for most of the trading, the
average stockpicker could not do better than average. The
meaningful question was, were there enough gaps in the market’s
e ciency so that some preidenti able group could beat the
market, and beat it consistently?
Borrowing from Jensen, Bu ett envisioned a “national coinipping contest.” Each day, everyone in the United States ipped a
coin, with those who ipped tails continually dropping out. After
twenty days, only 215 ippers would be left.
Now this group will probably start getting a little pu ed up about this, human nature

being what it is. They may try to be modest, but at cocktail parties they will
occasionally admit to attractive members of the opposite sex what their technique is,
and what marvelous insights they bring to the

eld of

ipping.… But then some

business school professor will probably be rude enough to bring up the fact that if 225
million orangutans had engaged in a similar exercise, the results would be much the
same.…33

But what if the surviving orangutans largely came from the
“same zoo,” located, conveniently, in Omaha? One would suspect
that the zookeeper had something to do with it. Bu ett’s
proposition was that a concentration of head- ippers did hail from
one zoo—from the “intellectual village” of “Graham-andDoddsville.” Then he laid out the records of nine Graham-and-Dodd
money managers—that is, all of those with whom Bu ett had had
a personal, and long, association. Their particular tastes varied
from cigar butts (Walter Schloss) to franchise stocks (Bill Ruane).
But each of the nine had beaten the market over an extended
period. And each had been preidenti ed as a Graham-and-Dodder;

that is, each had spent his career looking for discrepancies between
market price and intrinsic value. None had paid attention to
whether stocks did better on Monday or Thursday, or in January or
August.
Bu ett found it “extraordinary” that academics studied such
things. They studied what was measurable, rather than what was
meaningful. “As a friend [Charlie Munger] said, to a man with a
hammer, everything looks like a nail.”
Bu ett seemed especially resentful about the theory’s hold on his
alma mater. He was willing to give a lecture at Columbia, and did
so every year or two, but refused to donate money to it. John C.
Burton, the business school dean, said, “He told me very frankly he
didn’t think education was enhanced by money and secondly that
he didn’t think business schools were teaching the things he wanted
to support. He was very hostile to the idea of e cient market
research.”
Burton, who owned a few shares of Berkshire, thought Bu ett’s
reason was genuine, but incredibly myopic. Bu ett often cited his
personal debt to Graham, yet when Burton pressed him to give
something back—to endow, perchance, future Grahams and future
Bu etts—the billionaire would turn him down.
Columbia’s program was less one-sided than most. It hired Wall
Street pros as part-time lecturers, some of whom used a Grahamand-Dodd approach. But the nance program was, as Bu ett
maintained, dominated by E cient Market Theory. A stroll
through the business section of the university bookstore suggested
that a student could get an M.B.A. at Columbia without ever
hearing the names Graham and Dodd, and without even a faint
exposure to value investing. Eventually, Columbia established a
Graham-and-Dodd chair, but oddly assigned it to Bruce Greenwald.
Greenwald, an MIT-trained economist, had married into money,
made a million or two in bond futures, lost a similar sum in oils,
and quit at the insistence of his in-laws. “At investing I’m a
complete idiot,” he noted, rather a ably, adding that it was
speculating that turned him on. He invited Bu ett to give a guest
lecture but did not think him imitable. “I’m sympathetic to the

Graham-and-Dodd point of view,” Greenwald said, “but I’m not
really a Graham-and-Dodder.”34
On Wall Street, meanwhile, the theory made remarkable
inroads. There was a trend toward making security analysis
“precise.” Brokerages emphasized groups of stocks, rather than
selecting individual winners. In a remarkable comment, circa
1979, the chief strategist at Drexel Burnham said his aim was to
make the analyst less like an independent entrepreneur who
worked alone judging stocks.35 Less, that is, like a Warren Bu ett.
The introduction, in the 1980s, of stock-index futures marked the
theory’s coming-of-age. Academics had preached that investors
could not pick stocks. Now they needn’t try; they could heave a
single dart at the entire market. Bu ett urged Rep. John Dingell,
chairman of the House Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations, in 1982, not to permit such futures. “We do not
need more people gambling in nonessential instruments identi ed
with the stock market,” Bu ett wrote.36 In a prophetic aside, he
warned that futures could lead to speculative excesses and sour the
public on stocks altogether.
It is easy to lose sight of the distinction between “futures” and
stocks—after all, are they not both investments? This is arguable.
Futures are zero-sum bets on the market direction. They do not
raise capital for business, which is the essential purpose of the
stock market. They do not represent a stake in a business—merely
a stake in a wager.
In the eighties, money poured into futures as well as into “index
funds” designed to mimic the market averages (by owning every
stock or a reasonable proxy). Money managers were giving up
investing for trading the market whole—thus abandoning the job
assigned them by markets, which is to keep prices “right” by
searching out bargains and winnowing out the overpriced. By
1986, well over $100 billion was managed “passively,” meaning it
was not managed at all. It was chained to the Ouija board of
various market indices.
In the summer of 1986, there were, nally, cries that the trend
had gone too far. The occasion was a then-shocking 62-point drop

in the Dow. Perhaps too many people had been looking at Ouija
boards? Burton Malkiel, writing in the Wall Street Journal,
demurred. If markets were e cient, automaton investing was a
cause for celebration.
… I am proud to have been at least partly responsible [for] a growing faith in the

e ciency of stock markets and a trend toward passive portfolio management.37

Bu ett countered in the Washington Post, arguing that new-age
trading was ful lling Keynes’s dark prophecy of the market as a
casino. Speculation had so overwhelmed markets that their proper,
value-discovering role was being swamped by hyperactive trading.
The new, esoteric instruments were not “investments”; they served
no social agenda; they did the work not of the Invisible Hand but
of “an invisible foot kicking society in the shins.” Now Bu ett
trotted out a rather savage satire; he fantasized that a boat of
twenty- ve brokers were shipwrecked and forced to live out their
days on an uninhabited island.
Faced with developing an economy that would maximize their consumption and
pleasure, would they, I wonder, assign 20 of their number to produce food, clothing,

shelter, etc., while setting ve to endlessly trading options on the future output of the
20?38

As a remedy for the “casino society,” Bu ett proposed what
Jonathan Swift would have called “a modest tax”: 100 percent of
the pro ts on stocks and futures held for less than a year. This idea
disappeared without a trace. But fears about hyperactive trading
did not. In 1987, with markets restless, worries of a meltdown
escalated. Malkiel, writing in the New York Times, again defended
push-button trading as fostering “liquidity.” Alluding to the
market’s jumpiness, he added, “but the market only seems more
volatile because of a scale e ect.”39 His timing was o ; three
weeks later, the market crashed. The Brady report on Black
Monday uncovered a truism that Malkiel had missed: when

everyone lined up on the same side of a trade, the liquidity
provided by futures was an “illusion.”40
Malkiel had praised professional investors for using futures to
“shift and control risk and to respond to market movements.” In
Bu ett’s vision, true risk—the risk, say, that sales of carpets or of
World Book would hit a slump—could not be “shifted.” Such risk
was inherent to owning Berkshire. Nor did market movements call
for a “response.” He blamed the crash on the very people Malkiel
had praised:
We have “professional” investors, those who manage many billions, to thank for most

of this turmoil. Instead of focusing on what businesses will do in the years ahead,
many prestigious money managers now focus on what they expect other money
managers to do in the days ahead.41

The market survived the crash, but the theory was badly
wounded. How could prices have been rational both before and
after? No new information had surfaced to account for such a drop.
There had been no sudden change in expected future pro ts.
Indeed, for the people who sold stocks on October 19, corporate
pro ts were not a remote consideration. According to Robert J.
Shiller, a Yale economist who surveyed nearly one thousand
investors soon after Black Monday, the only news that investors
had been aware of that day was news of the crash itself. In place
of the cold, “unromantic” investor of Brealey and Myers, Shiller’s
respondents reported sweaty palms, rapid pulse rates, and
hypertension. On average, they had checked prices thirty- ve
times. The survey presented a microcosm of crowd psychology in
action, with 40 percent of the institutional investors experiencing
“a contagion of fear from other investors.”42
In another blow, Eugene Fama demonstrated that the beta of a
stock had no relation to its actual return.43 Nobel prizes had been
awarded for treatises on beta; now, it developed, beta was useless.
But analysts and academics continued to use it. De nitions were
rejiggled here and there, but the structure was left intact. Indeed,

as the Economist reported, the theory itself lived on, despite the
“awkward” facts.
As Charles Goodhart, of the London School of Economics, points out, no one has

thought up a better theory. Instead, academics have tried to reinterpret the awkward
evidence in less-threatening ways.44

The post-crash edition of Brealey and Myers was unreformed. It
conceded, in a brief passage, that Black Monday posed some
problems. But on the same page, the authors again advised,
“… you can trust prices.” But which prices—of the morning of
October 19, or of six hours later? Never mind; the theory was
“remarkably well-supported by the facts.”45
In a broader sense, the theory retained its hold on the investing
culture. Wall Street pros continued to ock to esoteric new
instruments, and advisers continued to counsel extreme
“diversi cation.” Berkshire shareholders, in particular, were
continually being advised that they should “diversify”—that is,
should sell. J. P. Morgan was trustee for one woman who had
virtually all of her money in Berkshire. As her portfolio soared into
the millions, her man at Morgan repeatedly (but vainly) urged her
to lighten up. It did not occur to him that one investment might be
better than another. He a xed a note to her statement to cover
himself: “Co-trustee/bene ciary refuses to sell Berkshire Hathaway.
…”
In a narrow sense, the persistence of the theory was a boon to
Bu ett’s career. Thousands of his potential competitors were
taught that studying securities was a waste of time. “From a sel sh
point of view,” Bu ett wrote after the crash, “Grahamites should
probably endow chairs to ensure the perpetual teaching of EMT.”46
But Bu ett would have preferred that schools perpetuate the
teaching of Bu ett. In academia, he was still an “anomaly,” a “red
herring,” a “three-sigma” irrelevancy. “No one,” he wrote of the
theory’s proponents,

has ever said he was wrong, no matter how many thousands of students he has sent
forth misinstructed. EMT, moreover, continues to be an integral part of the investment
curriculum at major business schools.47

And Bu ett was not. But in the aftermath of Black Monday, Bu ett
was to give his most convincing lesson ever.

Chapter 18

SECRETS OF THE TEMPLE

In the fall of 1988, Coca-Cola noticed that somebody was buying
its stock. Roberto C. Goizueta, the chairman, and Donald Keough,
the president, were more than mildly curious about who it was.
The stock had fallen 25 percent from its pre-crash high, and the
mysterious investor was gulping down shares by the caseload.
When Keough saw that a broker in the Midwest was doing the
buying, he suddenly thought of his former neighbor. “You know,”
he told Goizueta with a start, “it could be Warren Bu ett.”
Goizueta urged Keough to call him.
“Well, Warren, what’s going on?” Keough began. “You don’t
happen to be buying any shares of Coca-Cola?”
“It so happens that I am,” Bu ett replied.1
Bu ett asked Keough to stay mum until he was required to
disclose his stake. In the meantime, he continued to accumulate the
stock. By the next spring, Berkshire had acquired $1.02 billion
worth, or 7 percent of the Coca-Cola Co., at an average price of
$10.96 a share. When the news broke, Bu ett passed it o on his
Cherry Coke dependency, quipping that the investment was “the
ultimate case of putting your money where your mouth is.”2
Otherwise, he was delphic:

It’s like when you marry a girl. Is it her eyes? Her personality? It’s a whole bunch of
things you can’t separate.3

A Wall Street analyst termed it a “very expensive stock.”4 But in a
mere three years, Bu ett’s stake in Coca-Cola would soar to an
astounding $3.75 billion—roughly the value of all of Berkshire
when it had begun investing in Coca-Cola.
What happened to Coca-Cola in those three years? Income per
share rose 64 percent—a heady gain, but hardly enough to justify
the near quadrupling of its stock. What did the trick, more nearly,
was a sea change in Wall Street’s perception of the business. It
suddenly dawned on investors that as popular as Coke was, it had
barely scratched the surface in the planet’s most populous regions.
The average American was guzzling 296 Cokes a year, compared
to only thirty-nine drinks for the typical foreigner. And Coca-Cola
was rushing to close the gap, aggressively expanding in markets
such as Eastern Europe, France, China, and the entire Paci c Rim.
It was already earning more in Japan than it was at home.5 In
places such as Indonesia, where the per capita intake was only
four Cokes a year, the potential was vast. Keough crowed, “When I
think of Indonesia—a country on the equator with 180 million
people, a median age of eighteen, and a Moslem ban on alcohol—I
feel I know what heaven looks like.”6 By 1991, judging from its
stock, Wall Street did, too.
But what had inspired Bu ett to become the biggest single owner
of Coca-Cola just before its surge? What had inspired him to invest
more—much, much more—in Coca-Cola than in any previous
stock? Was it just a lucky dart? Or was it, as Bu ett maintained, as
close to a sure thing as he had ever seen?7
Many of his previous investments had hinged on speci c events,
or on values that could be tabulated from a balance sheet. The
Washington Post had been selling for a mere fraction of its
liquidation value, while GEICO, acquired for next to nothing, had
been an absolute steal if one was convinced that the then troubled
company would survive. Coca-Cola was di erent. Bu ett couldn’t

derive its value from the balance sheet. He couldn’t compute the
value. But he could see it.
He was often asked, how did he determine the “value” of a
stock? Conceptually, Bu ett likened it to that of a bond. A bond’s
value was equal to the cash ow from future interest payments,
discounted back to the present. A stock’s value was gured the
same way; it equaled the anticipated cash ow per share,* except
that the investor had to ll in a crucial detail:
If you buy a bond, you know exactly what’s going to happen, assuming it’s a good
bond, a U.S. Government bond. If it says 9 percent, you know what the coupons are

going to be for maybe thirty years.… Now, when you buy a business, you’re buying
something with coupons on it, too, except, the only problem is, they don’t print in the
amount. And it’s my job to print in [to gure out] the amount on the coupon.9

With this notion of value in mind, Bu ett tried to nd stocks
whose “value” was greater—signi cantly greater—than their price.
Bu ett’s guides to nding such a stock could be summarized
quickly:
• Pay no attention to macroeconomic trends or forecasts, or to people’s predictions

about the future course of stock prices. Focus on long-term business value—on the
size of the coupons down the road.

• Stick to stocks within one’s “circle of competence.” For Bu ett, that was often a
company with a consumer franchise. But the general rule was true for all: if you didn’t

understand the business—be it a newspaper or a software rm—you couldn’t value
the stock.

• Look for managers who treated the shareholders’ capital with ownerlike care and
thoughtfulness.

• Study prospects—and their competitors—in great detail. Look at raw data, not

analysts’ summaries. Trust your own eyes, Bu ett said. But one needn’t value a
business too precisely. A basketball coach doesn’t check to see if a prospect is six foot
one or six foot two; he looks for seven-footers.

• The vast majority of stocks would not be compelling either way—so ignore them.
Merrill Lynch had an opinion on every stock; Bu ett did not. But when an investor

had conviction about a stock, he or she should also show courage—and buy a ton of it.

Bu ett did that. After the Cap Cities deal, in 1985, he sat for
three long years without buying a single common stock.† And then,
when Coca-Cola fell to attractive levels, he staked a fourth or so of
Berkshire’s market value on that one stock.
The question was: why then? Coca-Cola’s stock, after all, had
been cheaper years before, and the global reach of its drink was
hardly new. Robert Winship Woodru , the Georgia tycoon who
became Coca-Cola’s president in 1923, had been determined to
make Coke available everywhere on earth. In 1928, it was bottled
in China. During World War II, the company persuaded the U.S.
government to ferry
fty-nine bottling plants overseas,
theoretically to boost troop morale and not incidentally to spread
the soda.10 In 1949, nine Buddhist priests presided over the
opening of a plant in Bangkok. Such was Coke’s universality that
in 1956, an enterprising Coke publicist set forth to nd an
innocent to whom he could introduce the drink. He trekked 150
miles into the Peruvian back country, encountered an Indian
woman in the jungle, and, through an interpreter, explained his
mission. The woman reached into a sack and pulled out a bottle of
Coke.11
Bu ett was exposed to this wondrous beverage in about 1935.
“Of a certainty,” he wrote to shareholders,
it was in 1936 that I started buying Cokes at the rate of six for 25¢ from Bu ett & Son,
the family grocery store, to sell around the neighborhood for 5¢ each. In this
excursion into high-margin retailing, I duly observed the extraordinary consumer

attractiveness and commercial possibilities of the product. I continued to note these
qualities for the next 52 years as Coke blanketed the world. During this period,
however, I carefully avoided buying even a single share, instead allocating major

portions of my net worth to street railway companies, windmill manufacturers,
anthracite producers, textile businesses … and the like.12

Coca-Cola was the sort of “simple” business—one with pricing
power and a protective “moat”—that Bu ett came to crave,

particularly in the 1970s, as his taste began to shift from
“anthracite” to franchise companies such as See’s. Coca-Cola’s
main business was not selling Coke; it was providing concentrate
and syrup to bottlers and soda fountains. Such a business (unlike
bottling) required little capital. What’s more, its name recognition
was unique, especially overseas, where Coke outsold Pepsi four-toone.13 In Bu ett’s terms, the brand name was a sort of a universal
toll bridge.
However, by the seventies, though the drink had blanketed the
world, the company was adrift. Sales overseas had been left to the
individual bottlers, not all of whom were up to the job. Also,
certain cultural proclivities slowed Coke’s acceptance (in France,
opponents of Americanization made common cause with
vineyards).14 Even worse, J. Paul Austin, the chief executive, did
not know what to do with Coca-Cola’s surplus cash. By mid-decade,
that was a $300 million problem. Austin, a handsome, red-haired
Olympic rower from Harvard, by then secretly ailing from
Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s,15 invested in a string of un-cola
diversi cations: water puri cation, wine, shrimp farming, plastics,
whey-based nutritional drinks, and fruits and vegetables. Bu ett
thought such moves were squandering precious capital.16 And,
indeed, the average annual return on Coca-Cola’s stock during the
seventies was a miserable 1 percent.
Goizueta, a Cuban-born chemical engineer, took over in 1981
and made Keough, a broad-smiling salesman, his number two.
Goizueta’s rst instinct was to continue diversifying.17 In 1982,
Coca-Cola branched into movies by acquiring Columbia Pictures, a
sideshow that Bu ett disliked.18 Its annual report for that year
devoted six pages to its lm studio (including a full-page photo of
a sunburned Dustin Ho man) and wine business and only three
pages to overseas cola sales.
The company also was rolling out diet Coke, which proved to be
a winner. Goizueta soon began to shift his focus to the burgeoning
battle for the U.S. cola market.19 He was so caught up in ghting
Pepsi-Cola that in 1985 Coca-Cola ditched the syrup formula that
had served it for a century and unveiled “New Coke.” This

stupendous error paid an unexpected dividend. The old drink was,
truly, brought back by popular demand.
Bu ett switched his drink from Pepsi to Cherry Coke at about the
same time. The stream of cherry- avored zz seems to have had a
catalytic e ect, and he began to look at Coca-Cola’s stock with
increasing interest.20 The New Coke asco merely made the
company more compelling to him. As Bu ett explained it, CocaCola knew that Americans had preferred the sweeter New Coke, but
when people were told about the switch, they wanted their old
Coke back. The drink had “something other than just the taste—the
accumulated memory of all those ballgames and good experiences
as children which Coke was a part of.”21 As Bu ett dug into his
research, he read everything on Coca-Cola he could nd. One
paragraph in a Fortune story caught his eye:
Several times every year a weighty and serious investor looks long and with profound
respect at Coca-Cola’s record, but comes regretfully to the conclusion that he is
looking too late.22

This had been published way back in 1938 (when the stock,
adjusted for later splits, cost forty-six cents a share). Even then,
Coke had been seen as “a sublimated essence” of all that America
stood for;23 even then, the sound of a nickel dropping down the
slot, followed by “a whir and a clunk” and an ice-cold bottle
sliding out the chute, had been something to behold. And it had
been known, even in 1938, that the potential thirst of people
overseas was far from quenched. That was the thing that got to
Bu ett.
By the mid-eighties, he saw that the light had nally dawned on
Coca-Cola’s management. Goizueta was divesting the company’s
un-cola side ventures. And the Yale-educated sugar baron’s son,
who had begun his career at a bottling plant in Havana, was
paying more attention to marketing Coke overseas.
A case in point was the Philippines, where the San Miguel
brewery, which bottled Coke as well as beer, had neglected soft
drinks and allowed Pepsi to take the lead in colas. The home o ce

invested $13 million to become a partner in its bottler, and CocaCola soon won back two-thirds of the market.24
Spurred by success in the Philippines, Coca-Cola moved to
strengthen bottling operations in Brazil, Egypt, Taiwan, China,
Indonesia, Belgium, Holland, and Britain. In France, where the per
capita was a dismal thirty-one drinks a year, Coca-Cola began a
lengthy ght to sack its bottler. Also, the company became more
attentive to margins. In Mexico, a big market with subpar pro ts,
prices were hiked and earnings soared. The change in focus was
hardly a secret—in fact, it screamed out from the pages of CocaCola’s annual reports. The cover of the 1986 report depicted three
Coke cans perched on top of the world. Inside, the company
hungrily eyed its future:
The potential appears limitless, and the Coca-Cola system is aggressively

implementing … soft drink availability, a ordability and acceptability around the
world.

The numbers in those reports showed that Coca-Cola’s strategy
was reaping a substantial payo . From 1984 to 1987—that is,
before Bu ett invested—the total of gallons sold overseas rose 34
percent.25 Pro t margins on each gallon rose, too, from 22 percent
to 27 percent, thus providing a double dip. In all, foreign pro ts
surged from $607 million to $1.11 billion.
The larger picture was of a company redirected. Whereas in
1984 Coca-Cola had earned just a shade more than half (52
percent) of its pro ts overseas, by 1987 a full three-fourths of its
income was international. And the untapped potential remained
vast. In the fast-growing Paci c Rim, people still drank fewer than
twenty- ve Cokes a year; in Africa, even fewer. Even in Europe
and Latin America, where Coke had been served for decades, the
per capitas were less than one hundred.26 Moreover, the pro ts per
drink in those populous and far from sated areas were much, much
higher than at home. To Bu ett, it amounted to a convincing case
that the “coupons” on Coca-Cola would be rising for a very long

time. “What I then perceived,” Bu ett wrote after his investment
but before the stock had really taken o ,
was both clear and fascinating … What was already the world’s most ubiquitous
product [had] gained new momentum, with sales overseas virtually exploding.27

In addition, Goizueta was using the company’s excess cash to
buy back stock—the same approach that Bu ett had urged on
Katharine Graham at the Post. He was also grading his managers
according to their return on capital. Sounding remarkably like
Bu ett, Goizueta, who had no training in nance, would later
remark, “I learned that when you start charging people for their
capital, all sorts of [good] things happen.”28 Bu ett recognized a
kindred spirit.29
By the latter part of 1988, Coca-Cola was trading at thirteen
times expected 1989 earnings, or about 15 percent above the
average stock. That was more than a Ben Graham would have
paid. But given its earning power, Bu ett thought he was getting a
Mercedes for the price of a Chevrolet. In his own mind, he was not
abandoning Graham—far from it.
I felt as sure of the margin of safety with Coke as when I bought Union Street Railway

at 40 percent of net cash. In both cases you’re getting more than you’re paying for. It’s
just that one was easier to spot.30

In fact, every analyst on Wall Street had spotted it. What Bu ett
knew about Coca-Cola was disclosed in detail in company reports
and was understood, intuitively, by the average fourth-grader.
Coke, simply, was the best-known brand in the world. But with a
couple of exceptions (First Boston’s Martin Romm called Coca-Cola
a “strong buy”), the analysts dithered. It wasn’t their research that
failed them, it was nerve. Dean Witter’s Lawrence Adelman
observed, “Coca-Cola has the potential to expand pro ts at a rate
signi cantly higher than the S&P 500 over the next ve years.”31
But Adelman couldn’t pull the trigger; he sent his clients a wa ing
“buy/hold” opinion on the stock. Roy Burry, Kidder Peabody’s man

on the beat, also expected strong pro t growth, but Burry was
dissuaded from recommending the stock by “uncertainty about the
near-term movement of the dollar.”32
A more interesting case was PaineWebber’s Emanuel Goldman,
who liked Coca-Cola but preferred the more diversi ed PepsiCo.33
Goldman showed the Wall Street disease of paying too close
attention to the trees. Pepsi, he noted, could expect a boost from
higher Frito Lay prices, better results with Mountain Dew, home
delivery of Pizza Hut, a forty-nine-cent meal at Taco Bell, and
healthier fare at Kentucky Fried Chicken. Bu ett also looked at
Pepsi (which would also turn out well).34 But he did not have the
same degree of certainty about pizza, chicken, and tacos. He could
reduce Coke’s virtues to a sentence:
If you gave me $100 billion and said take away the soft drink leadership of Coca-Cola
in the world, I’d give it back to you and say it can’t be done.35

After Bu ett invested in Coca-Cola he became one of its
directors, but his role on the board was passive.36 In short, anyone
could have bought the stock when he did and gotten the same
result. Yet Wall Streeters were dubious that much could be learned
from Bu ett. They maintained that he got his ideas from a network
of tipsters that they, of course, could not hope to crack. As an
Omaha broker said, with a knowing air, “Warren had the best
network.” This ful lled the hoariest of Wall Street clichés: that the
little guy was no match for the savvy pro.
A few of Bu ett’s negotiated deals, such as Salomon, did arise
from personal connections, and Bu ett’s circle of such contacts was
extensive. But most of his investments were market-traded stocks.
And, in fact, he instructed his brokers not to distract him with their
hot ideas.37 According to Munger, he used his contacts to
investigate prospects after he had a lead.
Given Bu ett’s usual holding period, tips would have been of
dubious value—it is hard to conceive of a “tip” that would be
relevant ve years later. However, the “tips” rationalization
absolved others who had not thought of the same ideas, and who

resented Bu ett’s success. Once, when an investor put in an order
for yet more Berkshire, his Manhattan broker snapped, “Warren
makes mistakes, too.” It is hardly a surprise that Bu ett was
resented, since he made a point of mocking the complex “tools” on
which other money managers relied. And some of these others,
being less than anxious to slog through annual reports, were
reluctant to believe that Bu ett found his stocks the way he said he
did. One nancial editor inquired about Bu ett’s “secret”—a black
box, perhaps, hidden in the bowels of Kiewit Plaza?
Bu ett kept insisting that he had no mysterious shortcut, no
crystal ball. Once, a broker who was buying a house asked for his
outlook on interest rates. Bu ett jokingly replied, “Only two
people understand that. Both of them live in Switzerland.
However, they’re diametrically opposed to each other.”38
Most of what Bu ett did, such as reading reports and trade
journals, the small investor could also do. He felt very deeply that
the common wisdom was dead wrong; the little guy could invest in
the market, so long as he stuck to his Graham-and-Dodd knitting.39
But people, he found, either took to this approach immediately or
they never did. Many had a “perverse” need to make it
complicated.40 This truism extended to Bu ett’s family.
His elder sister Doris once tried to juice up her income by selling
“naked options”—precisely the sort of market roulette that Bu ett
had scorned. Come Black Monday, Doris, who rather liked living
on the edge, found herself $1.4 million in debt.41 Warren agreed to
reorganize a family trust that he administered for Doris, so that she
would now get a monthly stipend from it. But he atly refused to
pay o the debt—leaving Doris no choice but to default. She was
badly hurt by Warren’s refusal, and he was hurt by her subsequent
spell of coolness. But bailing out a speculator went against his
grain—and Warren would not break his rules, not even for his
sister.
Of course, following Graham and Dodd would not make Doris—
or most anyone else—as gifted as Bu ett. At the mere mention of a
stock—any stock—he could spit back a fact- lled summary of it,
just as the young Warren had once recited from memory the

populations of cities. Similarly, his ability for gures left his
colleagues stunned.42 (Bu ett explained his penchant for mental
math by saying that if he didn’t understand a gure in his head, he
didn’t “understand” it; thus, no computer.)43
People habitually referred to his mental processes in mechanical
terms. Doris, herself, re exively remarked how quickly information
appeared on Warren’s “screen”; Mike Goldberg spoke of his
“iterating” insurance policies through his memory. This agile
sifting of mental index cards enabled him to recognize past
patterns and, through untold repetitions, develop an investing
instinct. Alas, the average investor is not endowed with a mental
calculator or an on-line encyclopedia.
This does not imply that Bu ett could not be a useful model. (A
clinic with Ted Williams should make one a better hitter, even if
not a .400 hitter.) Anyone is free to adopt the approach of
evaluating a stock as a share of a business, rather than a blip on a
screen, just as anyone is free to trade options. Munger said the
Bu ett style was “perfectly learnable.”
Don’t misunderstand. I do not think that tens of thousands of people can perform as
well. But hundreds of thousands can perform quite well—materially better—than they
otherwise might. There is a duality there.

Part of the “duality” was that people confused “simplicity” with
“ease.” Bu ett’s methodology was straightforward, and in that
sense “simple.” It was not simple in the sense of being easy to
execute. Valuing companies such as Coca-Cola took a wisdom
forged by years of experience; even then, there was a highly
subjective element. A Berkshire stockholder once complained that
there were no more franchises like Coca-Cola left. Munger tartly
rebuked him. “Why should it be easy to do something that, if done
well two or three times, will make your family rich for life?”44
Bu ett said it did not require a formal education, nor even a
high IQ.45 What mattered was temperament. He would illustrate
this with a little game at business schools. Suppose, he would tell a
class, each student could be guaranteed 10 percent of one of their

classmates’ future earnings. Whom would they choose? The
students would start to scrutinize one another intently. They
weren’t looking for the smartest, necessarily, Bu ett would
observe, but for someone with the intangibles: energy, discipline,
integrity, instinct.
What mattered most was con dence in one’s own judgment,
from which would ow the Kiplingesque cool to keep one’s head
“when all about you are losing theirs.” In market terms, if you
knew what a stock was worth—what a business was worth—then a
falling quote was no cause for alarm. Indeed, before he invested in
a stock, Bu ett wanted to feel su ciently comfortable so that if the
market were to close for a period of years and leave him with no
quoted price at all, he would still be happy owning it.46 This
sounds extraordinary, but one’s house is not quoted day-by-day,
and most people do not lose sleep over its value. That is how
Bu ett looked at Coca-Cola.
The disclosure of his investment, in March 1989, seemed to inject
the stock of Berkshire Hathaway with an unusually bubbly carbon
dioxide. Berkshire, at the time, was trading at $4,800 a share. In a
mere six months, it rose 66 percent, to $8,000.
Bu ett, now worth $3.8 billion, seemed born to his new
investment. He quickly became a fount of Coca-Colaisms. He
would recite to any who would listen Coke’s “per capitas” in
countries around the globe, or dissect a can of Coke according to
its nancial ingredients. He knew the sales, the growth rates. He
got a rush from gazing at the red-and-white cases stacked up in a
supermarket, and he took comfort, he explained to a visitor, in
knowing that people were drinking the product at that very
moment, as they were sitting there in Bu ett’s o ce.47 He knew
the gures by rote: a penny of pro t on each eight-ounce serving,
700 million servings a day, 250 billion a year.
* Bu ett de ned cash

ow as reported earnings plus depreciation, depletion, amortization,

and certain other noncash charges, less the average annual capital expenditures required for a

company to maintain its unit volume and competitive position.8
† Does not include arbitrage or undisclosed small purchases.

Chapter 19

HOWIE BUFFETT’S CORN

In 1980, Bu ett had written a scathing article in the Omaha WorldHerald blasting the self-indulgence of the superrich. To Bu ett, a
vast pool of wealth, such as his own, represented a pile of “claim
checks,” which ultimately should bene t society. He zeroed in on
Hearst, who had squandered his claim checks on the grandiose San
Simeon, thus diverting “massive amounts of labor and material
away from other societal purposes.”
Bu ett was just as critical of the superrich for leaving fortunes to
their heirs. The latter-day Du Ponts, for example, had “contributed
very little, if anything, to society while claiming a great many
times their pro rata share of its output.” With a typically
egalitarian air, Bu ett noted that the Du Ponts “might believe
themselves perceptive in observing the debilitating e ects of food
stamps for the poor” but were themselves living o a “boundless”
supply of “privately funded food stamps.”1
The Du Ponts would not have recognized the Bu ett clan.
Warren had a cousin who drove a cab, a nephew who played in a
jazz band, and so on. Some of them owned stock in Berkshire, but
Bu ett went out of his way to avoid giving favors or tips. His

familial relationships, he felt, would be “cleaner” without the
distorting element of nancial dependency.
Most of all, he wanted his grown children to lead normal,
independent lives. This forced him, at least as he saw matters,
virtually to cut them o from nancial support. He was so wary of
spoiling his likable kids with “food stamps” that he refused them
even the dollop of nancial help that children of moderately
wealthy parents receive as a matter of course.
His attitude ba ed his millionaire friends (save for Munger, who
came close to agreeing with him). When the Graham group
debated what was the “right amount” to leave to one’s children,
Bu ett said a few hundred thousand ought to do it.2 Larry Tisch
protested, “Warren, that’s wrong. If they aren’t spoiled by age
twelve, they won’t be spoiled.” As Kay Graham, who was grooming
her son to take over the Post, recalled, “That was the one thing we
[Bu ett and she] argued about.”
Bu ett did care very deeply about his kids. Moreover, he was a
tolerant, in some respects an enlightened, father. He encouraged
his kids to follow their stars, and he was patient when one of them
su ered a disappointment—in a career, for instance, or in a
marriage. But where money was involved he was impersonal and
at arm’s length, as though his kids were merely junior nancial
partners. There was a good deal of sanity in his approach—a
billionaire should set limits—but Bu ett, as in his professional life,
was blind to any middle ground. When Susie needed $20 to park at
the airport, she had to write her father a check. When Bu ett gave
his kids a loan, they had to sign a loan agreement, so that it would
be plain, in black and white, that they were legally on the hook to
him.3
Many Berkshire holders gave substantial gifts of stock to their
kids—but not Bu ett. He simply gave $10,000—the tax-deductible
limit—to each child and to any of their spouses at Christmas.
Such restraint sent them a message, just as giving them millions
would have. When the kids were toddlers, Bu ett had written to
Jerry Orans that he wanted to defer any largesse at least until he
could see “what the tree has produced.” In young adulthood, Susie,

Howie, and Peter must have grasped that their father still viewed
his saplings as un nished. Philosophically, they defended his
approach, and with considerable pride. But they also wondered, as
Howie put it, why he couldn’t “lighten up,” and at times seemed to
resent his unsubtle e orts to motivate them.
The Bu ett kids had open, direct manners that put one in mind
of their father (none drank anything stronger than Coke). They
also had his eagerness, but were slow bloomers. Each dropped out
of college, and each entered into an early, ill-fated marriage.
Financially, they had inherited a grubstake from Warren’s father,
which Warren had invested for them in Berkshire. Thus they could
have been millionaires without working a day.
Susie, alas, sold some stock (when it was under $1,000 a share)
to buy a Porsche. After her marriage dissolved, she moved to
Washington. There she made contact with Kay Graham, who took
it upon herself to help her get an administrative job at The New
Republic.4 In 1983, Susie remarried, to Allen Greenberg, a publicinterest lawyer and future congressional aide. Warren and his wife
were ecstatic about Greenberg, a wry, mild-mannered sort, whom
they referred to as “Allen-the-perfect-son-in-law.”5
By the time the Greenbergs moved into a townhouse near
Dupont Circle, Susie had used up her Berkshire. The young couple
rented out part of their home and had just a tiny kitchen—very
tiny. When Susie became pregnant, she wanted a larger kitchen for
when the baby came—something she could t a table into, with a
door to the backyard. She had plans drawn up and got an estimate
of $30,000. Knowing that her father wouldn’t spring for it, she
asked him for a loan, at prevailing interest rates.
Warren turned her down.
“Why not go to the bank and take a loan out like everyone
else?” he suggested.
They had a long discussion, in which Warren explained that if he
were the quarterback of the Nebraska football team it wouldn’t be
fair of him to pass down the job to a son or daughter, and that he
felt the same about his money. This was a “rational” response with
his daughter’s “best interests” in mind. That was the rub; it was too

rational, as if Susie had been just anyone. His daughter was
troubled by it.6
When Susie was expecting her second child, she spent much of
the time bedridden. “Mrs. Graham”—an ally—would come to
dinner with her cook in tow, ferrying glazed monk sh and
poached peaches up the steps to Susie’s bedroom. Noticing that
Susie had only a small black-and-white television in the room,
Graham suggested that she get a bigger, color set—and was
horri ed to learn that Bu ett’s daughter couldn’t a ord one.
Warren, after all, had a large-screen TV in his house. Graham
promptly called Warren, and this time he relented and bought
Susie a proper TV.7 Still, Graham had had to shame him into it.
Perhaps because money was the pivotal motivator in his life,
Bu ett acted as though money were a similarly pervasive and
overriding focal point for others. He seemed to think that Susie
would see a new television in terms of dollar signs (as he would),
or that such a gift could somehow mar his daughter’s open and
unspoiled character. To her, it was just a TV.
But Susie deeply admired her father and probably had the easiest
time accepting him. Dark-haired and vibrant, she recounted the
saga of her kitchen as consistent with everything she knew of him.
“He has a at-out thing,” she said, as if to explain him. “He just
doesn’t give us money.”
For Howie, living up to his father was more of a struggle. He had
an open-collared, sneakered informality that recalled his dad, but
there was a aw in the likeness, in that Howie was a good deal
heavier. Having sold his Berkshire to nance his earthmoving
venture—Bu ett Excavating, which proved to be short-lived—as
well as a house, Howie had gone to work for See’s Candy in Los
Angeles. In the early eighties, he had returned to Omaha,
remarried and started a family, and gotten a job in real estate. As
an aside, he rented some land and planted crops.
As Warren knew, what Howie really wanted was a farm. After
“torturing” himself, as a friend put it, Warren made what for him
was a truly generous proposal. He o ered to buy a farm and rent it

to Howie on standard commercial terms (Howie would have to
fork over a percentage of his farm income and pay the taxes).
Howie asked his mother why Warren was getting involved.
“Don’t ask,” Susie advised. “Just get the farm.”
But that was not so easy. Warren announced a ceiling to what he
would pay for a farm, depending on its potential income. Howie
went to farm after farm, making bids “of insulting proportion.”
When he’d seen about one hundred of them, he began to despair of
getting one, but Warren refused to bend on the price. Finally, in
1985, they bought a farm for about $300,000 in Tekamah,
Nebraska, forty- ve minutes north of Omaha.
“It was a typical Warren Bu ett purchase,” Howie observed. “We
bought it at the absolute bottom of the market. I think part of his
motivation was to teach me a little about negotiation.”
Howie didn’t even have a telephone at the farm, but it was a
joyful refuge for him. He would go out in the spring and fall, often
taking his family, working columns of corn and soybeans with a
John Deere tractor. But he couldn’t get Warren to share the
experience with him. “I can’t get him to come out and see how the
crops are going,” Howie said plaintively.
Warren went only twice in six years. He would laugh o Howie’s
invitations, saying, “Send me a rent check, and make sure it’s big
enough.” Though he had been thoughtful enough to buy the farm,
he couldn’t give Howie the fatherly recognition that he craved in
other than nancial terms. He could look at Howie’s books, but not
at his crops—which is what Howie cared about. To Warren, it was
just a business. Inasmuch as corn and soybeans are commodities,
Warren was blunt about the farm’s being not a very good business
at that, sardonically observing, “No one goes to the supermarket to
buy Howie Bu ett’s corn.”8
Warren did use the farm to “teach” Howie something; he agreed
to lower his rent for any year in which Howie got his weight below
a speci ed ceiling. (Warren was obsessed with staying slim, which
he associated with longevity. He made similar “weight deals” for
money with his wife and daughter.) In most years, this blatant

attempt to manipulate Howie’s weight with nancial plums
failed.9
Warren was more helpful when Howie turned to him for
guidance, as he often did. After he got the farm, Howie decided to
run for election as a county commissioner (as a Republican, like
Warren’s father). Howie was worried that Warren would be seen
either as trying to buy the election or—what would be worse—as
not supporting him at all. Warren defused this concern by
declaring that he would simply contribute 10 percent of whatever
Howie raised elsewhere—and Howie won.
Their relationship improved as Howie had kids of his own and,
particularly, as Howie’s career began to blossom.10 After his
election, Howie was appointed to a state board in charge of
promoting ethanol. Ethanol politics put him in touch with Dwayne
Andreas, the politically connected chairman of Archer Daniels
Midland. Eventually, Andreas hired him, and Howie became a jetsetting executive. Warren bragged to a friend that Howie was
“making more” than Warren was, which was his way of showing
pride in Howie.11 Seeing his kids succeed on their own “was a real
issue with him,” Howie observed—just as getting approval from
Warren was a real issue for Howie.
Warren’s younger son acknowledged this openly. Peter had quit
Stanford to start a sound studio and, ignoring his father’s sage
advice, had sold his Berkshire to buy a $30,000 twenty-four-track
tape recorder. He soon realized that he did not have the income to
justify it, but he and his wife slowly built a music-production
company, Independent Sound, in San Francisco. Later, they moved
to Milwaukee. Though mostly a jingle producer, Peter scored the
re-dance scene for the movie Dances with Wolves and recorded
several well-received albums of New Age music.
On a wintry Milwaukee morning, Peter ducked out of a
soundproof glass studio, where two musicians were cutting a
commercial, and began to talk about his father. He recounted one
rather clumsy attempt by Warren to in uence him. Warren had
invited Peter to the Alfalfa Club, a very exclusive annual dinner in

Washington, but stipulated that Peter cut his ponytail. Peter said
no thanks. “He likes to have strings attached,” Peter observed.
In recent years, Warren had started giving his $10,000 Christmas
gifts to his kids in various stocks, which Peter felt carried a
“message.” “Again—there was a string on it. He was saying this
isn’t just money to spend. If you invest it, it will grow to be more.
To test our patience.
“I sold most of my [Berkshire] stock. I’m glad I did,” Peter added,
the ponytail neatly tucked in a rubber band. “It’s so nice to say I’ve
gotten to this point without it.” But a moment later, he said he
regretted that his father had not told him—or perhaps that he had
not heard his father say—that he could have simply borrowed
against his Berkshire and held on to it.
Peter had an unassuming, even inquisitive, manner—as if he,
too, were curious about Warren’s character. He was extremely
proud of his father’s accomplishments and moral standards. He
recalled that Warren had once told him, “Someday you’re going to
have to tell your dad to go to hell.” Establishing himself in a new
city and selling his Berkshire were part of that, he said. Had
Warren ever told his father to go to hell? Peter acknowledged that
he didn’t know.
Peter got to know his father better as he had success as a
musician. When he played the piano with a fteen-piece band,
before an audience of seven hundred, in Milwaukee, Warren
attended and praised him profusely. At one point, he told his son,
“We do the same thing”—to Peter, an overwhelming tribute.
By the late eighties or so, Peter, who as a boy had purchased The
Father’s Handbook for his remote-seeming dad, felt that Warren and
he had nally learned how to talk to each other. When Peter’s
marriage broke up, Warren counseled him, and with more
empathy than he had shown in the past. One night, they were
shooting the breeze at Farnam Street. Around midnight, Peter
broached the subject of Peter’s mother, in intimate terms. Warren
talked about how he hoped that Susie would spend more time with
the Bu ett Foundation—more time in his world. “We talked about
how Mom had this great opportunity to do what she wants,” Peter

said. Warren suddenly grew silent—for him, a sign of emotion.
“We talked until 2:00 A.M.,” Peter recalled. “When it was over I
remember thinking, Wow, Dad was emotional.’ You could see it in
his expression, his lack of words. It blew me away.”
Warren’s renewal with his family may have stemmed in part
from a gradual healing with his wife. He had heard more, from
Susie directly, about her reasons for leaving him. They had an
understanding and a greater openness. As Tom Rogers, a close
nephew, put it, the Bu etts didn’t have to “try anything in their
relationship. They are each other’s alter ego. Aunt Susie is as much
able to cut emotion out of a decision as he is.”12
Warren was in constant contact with his wife. He saw her often,
and with as much a ection as ever. After an evening at Tom
Murphy’s home in Westchester County, when the Bu etts shared a
limousine with Stan Lipsey back to Manhattan, the two sat quietly
in the back, holding hands the entire way. Susie told a mutual
friend it had “worked out great,” meaning that Warren had gotten
what he wanted—to stay married to Susie.13 Even now, years after
Susie had moved out, she was the one—the only—person in the
world he fully trusted.
In 1987, Warren took a big step toward the family by o ering
Allen Greenberg, his son-in-law, the job of managing the Bu ett
Foundation. As usual, the carrot had a string—Susie and Allen
would have to move to Omaha.14 This they did, buying a home a
few blocks from Warren. Susie was soon bound up in Warren’s
supportive web. When he wanted a car, Susie went to the dealer
and picked it out. At annual-meeting time, Susie helped to organize
his social schedule. She was there for him.
As Warren was paying his son-in-law only $49,846 a year,
young Susie’s life was no di erent from those of other Omaha
mothers juggling young children and civic involvements. The
author happened to visit on a day when her son had chicken pox.
Susie was bathing him; she had no nurse or nanny. Ironically, Susie
was always fending o fund-raisers who were under the mistaken
notion that she had the keys to the fortune.

One time, when Warren was escorting the billionaire
Wunderkind of Microsoft, William Gates, through the Borsheim’s
jewelry store, they noticed a box in the corner labeled “Bu ett LayAway.” When Warren asked what it was, an employee sheepishly
confessed that Susie had asked them to save a string of pearls,
which she was buying on installment. As a birthday gift, Bu ett
paid o the balance. It began to dawn on him that spending
money—particularly at Borsheim’s—could be fun. Another time, he
remarked, as if discovering the wheel, “Gee, Suz, women really like
jewelry.”
With Susie around, Warren had a greater sense of extended
family. Susie often dropped her kids o at Warren’s for Astrid to
look after, which tended to knit Astrid into the Bu ett family. In
fact, Susie even urged Astrid to redo Warren’s house, which still
had the sunshiny (but now faded) look given it by Susie’s mom.
Astrid and the younger Susie redecorated together, giving it a more
subdued style, with Astrid’s signature collection of antique toasters
lining the kitchen. (Warren’s wife and at-home girlfriend were
closer than ever. This unlikely duo would send presents to Bu ett
relatives accompanied by a card signed by “Warren, Susie and
Astrid.”)15
The younger Susie, and her kids, were around Warren a lot. They
seemed to humanize him. He would come to the Greenbergs in a
worn jogging suit, get down on the oor, and play with the
grandkids. At dinner, he would listen to the family chatter with a
distracted look, pursing his lips, bobbing his chin, occasionally
inserting a wisecrack, and salting (and resalting, after every bite)
his hamburger. He told Kay Graham that Susie’s return to Omaha
had changed his life.16 He even gave her a ruby bracelet—for
Warren, hardly a casual gesture.
In a sign that he was becoming comfortable with “what the tree
produced,” he made his daughter a director of the Bu ett
Foundation and modestly relaxed his inheritance policy. The kids
would get something—maybe three million or so apiece.17 (He
didn’t tell the children how much.)

Whatever the gure, it would not allow Susie, Howie, and Peter
to lead the despised life of the “superrich.”18 Wholly apart from its
e ect on his kids’ lives, he simply didn’t think they were entitled to
vast amounts of money. It would confer too much power, which in
his view belonged to the public. “The idea that you get a lifetime
supply of food stamps based on coming out of the right womb
strikes at my idea of fairness,” he said.19 Ultimately, the claim
checks should go to society.
But philanthropy posed as large a dilemma to Bu ett as giving
money to his kids. The idea of bestowing a handout—even to
charities—made him edgy. James Burke, a friend who had left
Johnson & Johnson to run Partnership for a Drug-Free America,
said Bu ett had a “block.” If he gave the money away, he was
“giving away the chips he could use to make money.”
The Bu ett Foundation was for many years rather a joke. In
1979, when Bu ett had a net worth of $150 million, the
foundation’s total endowment was merely $725,000. Its gifts that
year were a tri ing $38,453.20 But after Bu ett began the
Berkshire charitable program, in 1981, Susie and he used it to fund
the foundation. And Bu ett steadily raised the corporate gift,
though it did not rise as quickly as Berkshire’s share price. By 1990,
each stockholder could allocate $6 a share from the Berkshire
treasury to a favored charity, meaning that Warren and Susie were
indirectly giving away $3 million.
As exemplary as this corporate program truly was, it didn’t
require Bu ett to take out his wallet. Of his private, non-Berkshire
money, of which he had many tens and perhaps hundreds of
millions,21 Bu ett did not give his foundation so much as a penny.
And even his indirect gift, via the Berkshire program, was
inconsequential compared to his $4 billion fortune.
Bu ett’s tightness was a sore spot with his friends. They knew
that he was socially conscious. They knew he didn’t spend it on
himself. And on a personal level, they thought of him as
“generous”—a word they often used. In an exceptional case,
Bu ett made small but anonymous Christmas payments
(discovered via a bank error) to the mother of his boyhood chum

Bob Russell. More typically, he showed a generosity of spirit in
non nancial gestures, such as writing thoughtful, handwritten
notes to people, or acting as their sounding board. But when even
close friends asked for money, and for worthy causes, Bu ett sent
them packing. The writer Geo rey Cowan called Bu ett when he
learned that Weekend Edition, the lively National Public Radio
news show, was facing a funding crisis. Without a fast $50,000,
Weekend Edition might go o the air. Most people would have
given something, if only because of social pressure, but Bu ett, in
his sweet independence, was perfectly comfortable saying no. He
didn’t give the news show a dime.22 Another friend, Ann Landers,
frequently urged Bu ett to loosen up. She tried her “darnedest,”
she said, to get him more interested “in what he could do for the
world.”
What he does is piling and heaping and heaping and piling. So what is this all about?
He did buy a plane, and he loves it. So I try to use the plane as an example. I say: “Look

how much fun you’re having with the plane. Maybe if you gave some of it away you’d
have fun with that.”

But Bu ett would shake her o with a chuckle.
Bu ett’s skepticism of philanthropy was shaped in part by an
experience in the 1970s with Grinnell College. His friend Joe
Rosen eld had persuaded him to join the board, and Bu ett turned
this small Iowa liberal arts college into a nancial powerhouse.
Under Bu ett’s direction, the Grinnell endowment bought a
television station in Dayton for $13.6 million and sold it four years
later for $48 million. But Bu ett was horri ed that Grinnell
actually spent some of this windfall—far too much, to his liking. As
he saw it, the money was being spent in ways that did not enhance
the students’ educations, and the professors had it rather easy.23
This soured him on higher education. He did give scholarships to
numerous individual students. But, as Greenberg said, “Warren
would rather choke to death than write a check to a university.”
When a fundraiser from his own University of Nebraska stopped

by the o ce, Bu ett—despite being a diehard Nebraska football
fan—wouldn’t even open the door for him.24
In fact, Bu ett approached philanthropy more or less as he did
investing. He refused to “diversify,” preferring that his foundation
give to a few “high-leverage” causes that he hoped would reap the
biggest social bang for the buck. Sensibly, he wanted to focus his
giving, and he recognized that in the case of many charities, too
much may be spent on administrator lunches and so forth. Once,
hosting a crowd of friends at Laguna Beach, Bu ett asked in none
too casual a way: “If you had to give money to one charity to do
the most good, which would it be?”25
He seemed to be searching for the Coca-Cola of charities—a
home run that would take society’s investment o the charts. This
worked for him in stocks, but was less suited to philanthropy.
Many of the types of projects that seek funding—in medical
research, for example—are apt to make gains in ts and starts. A
benefactor must be willing to take some losses. In other areas, such
as the ne arts, doing “the most good,” as Bu ett put it, may not
even be a meaningful concept. (But doing “some good” is
meaningful. Society would certainly be the poorer if no one
endowed museums.) Put di erently, social progress cannot be
measured as easily as the pro ts of Coca-Cola. But Bu ett wanted
to see “concrete results.”26
Given these constraints, he found it hard to nd suitable
charities.27 The Bu ett Foundation, which was managed by
Greenberg but jointly steered by Warren and his wife,28 salted
away much of its revenue for future giving. In 1990, the
foundation’s receipts from Berkshire and from income on its
portfolio totaled $3.8 million. But it donated just $2.3 million to
charities. Meanwhile, its assets were ballooning to $18 million. It
resembled nothing so much as a miniature Berkshire—its outlays
kept to a carefully chosen few while its assets were “piling and
heaping.”
Bu ett had two pet causes. The danger of nuclear war had
bothered him since Hiroshima, but disarmament did not seem a
goal that private citizens could further in any substantial way.

Bu ett brie y underwrote the research of George F. Kennan, the
famed ambassador to the Soviet Union who, while at Princeton,
was an advocate of drastic nuclear arms reductions. Then, in 1984,
Bu ett learned that William Ury, an expert on negotiation at
Harvard Law School, was working on ways to prevent accidental
war. Bu ett invited Ury to meet him for breakfast at the Boston
Ritz-Carlton and described to him, in very human terms, his fear of
Armageddon. Peering over the china, Bu ett asked Ury to envision
that thousands of white marbles were lying on the table, with one
black marble lying among them. Suppose, he added, somebody
picked up a marble every day. Sooner or later—maybe a century
later—they would reach for the black one. That would be nuclear
war.
Ury had proposed setting up “risk reduction centers” in Moscow
and Washington. These would be equipped with faxes and phones
and would be able to provide a communications channel during a
crisis. However, Ury noted that the United States, in those early
Reagan years, was hostile to working with the Soviets.
Bu ett said, “Look, these are human beings on the other side,
and we’ve set up these systems which could set the world a ame.”
Almost instantly, he added, “I’m going to fund you. I’m going to
give you a hundred grand.” (The foundation ultimately gave
$200,000.) Risk reduction centers were approved about a year
later, at the Reagan-Gorbachev summit in Geneva, and are still in
place.29 But with the end of the Cold War, there was less that
Bu ett could do about disarmament.
The mother of all Bu ett causes was population control. In 1990,
for example, about $1.7 million, or 75 percent of that year’s gifts,
was devoted to family planning, sex education, birth control,
abortion rights, and so on. Susie and Warren were both rm
believers, but their emphases di ered. While Susie was largely
inspired by the poor living conditions of people, and particularly
women, that she had seen in the Third World,30 Warren
conceptualized in macroeconomic terms. He had a Malthusian
dread that overpopulation would aggravate problems in all other
areas—such as food, housing, even human survival.31

As pragmatic as this view was, it is striking that both of Bu ett’s
“causes” were aimed at alleviating or preventing future sources of
grief, such as a future war or a future oversupply of people.
Virtually none of his immense resources went to help people who
were already born-people who were here and now poor, sick,
living in urban blight, illiterate; or people raising money for hereand-now concert halls, museums, universities, and hospitals (save
for endowments of abortion or family planning programs).*
Bu ett’s almost exclusive focus on such macroeconomic, futuristic
issues gave his philanthropy a detached—almost a dehumanized—
quality.
Traditional charities would have “spent” his money. On the other
hand, giving to population control could be construed as
“investing”—sort of a global share buyback—because it would
reduce the number of future divisors clamoring for the social pie.
Charlie Munger, who was equally Malthusian, articulated this
mind-set at a party for Keith Russell, a doctor who had been a
Munger-Bu ett ally in the Belous abortion rights case in California.
After some of Russell’s patients presented a toast to the many
babies he had delivered, Munger rose, glass held high, and
solemnly declared, “I want to toast Dr. Russell for the thousands of
babies he didn’t deliver.”32
The strangest aspect of Bu ett’s focusing on population control
was that he did not get the pleasure of seeing his money help
people. He often asked people if they had any good ideas for
philanthropy—as if the world had a shortage of such—but it didn’t
lead anywhere. He was hung up on the notion that the recipients
might be unworthy—that charity was a “food stamp” that would
likely corrupt both donor and donee. Interestingly, Bu ett was
equally uneasy receiving a handout. He once ordered a chocolate
malt at the Goodrich Dairy in Omaha and discovered—too late—
that he had nothing smaller than $100 bills, which the Goodrich
couldn’t change. An older woman who knew Bu ett happened to
be at the dairy, and she graciously paid for his malt, which cost all
of $1.50. Bu ett insisted that he would reimburse her for the malt.
But, to Bu ett’s supreme agony, he couldn’t remember the

woman’s name. It must have weighed on his conscience, because
he eventually found out and did repay her.33
The one philanthropic stroke that seemed to give Bu ett real
pleasure was an annual $10,000 award to each of fteen Omaha
public school teachers. The award was named for Bu ett’s Aunt
Alice, the teacher who had cared for him when he lived with his
grandfather, and the winners were chosen on the basis of merit,
which appealed to him. Bu ett liked to point out that rich people
threw money at their colleges in return for getting their names on
buildings, but did nothing for their elementary schools, which were
trusted with more formative years. He thought of the award as a
thank-you to Omaha.
However, his nonparticipation in the standard Omaha charity
drives was a sore spot among the city fathers. Robert Daugherty, a
local manufacturer, said, “Warren is renowned for not giving
money away.” Omaha had no tangible evidence that it was home
to one of the country’s richest men. There was no Bu ett wing in
the Joslyn museum, nor was there a Bu ett park in Omaha, nor a
Bu ett chair at the local college.
In 1990, after years of seeming indi erence, Bu ett did endow a
second trust, the Sherwood Foundation, solely for charities in
Omaha. It was much smaller than the Bu ett Foundation, but it
suggested that Bu ett—now sixty—was becoming aware that for
all that Omaha had done to shape him, he had given virtually
nothing back.
What confounded the pillars of Omaha was that in spite of
Bu ett’s parsimony, he obviously had a strong sense of community.
Politically, his disdain for handouts did not result in the expected
conservatism, but in a strong belief that government should work
on behalf of society as a whole, rather than hand out goodies to its
individual members. In 1977, long before it was common to attack
“special interests,” Bu ett pointedly criticized the “propensity of
major groups in our society to utilize their electoral muscle to shift,
rather than solve, economic problems.”34
Thereafter, he wrote occasional quite creative proposals for
dealing with economic issues, which were published in the

Washington Post. The general theme was to promote “pie
enlarging,” rather than “pie rearranging” (just as he was scornful
of “pie-rearranging” takeovers on Wall Street). One of his ideas
would have wiped out the trade de cit in a single stroke, without
resorting to quotas, tari s, or red tape. Under this elegant scheme,
the free market would have sorted out how many Nissan trucks to
import and how many Adidas running shoes, but all within a
framework that (with one, simple governmental edict) would have
limited the total of such imports to the total of exports.35 Bu ett’s
premise was that society had a stake in an overall trade balance,
but not in playing referee between various industries—a job that it
does rather poorly.
Though he did not oppose actual “food stamps,” he was
generally skeptical of government transfers. One of his most
piercing essays was an allegorical warning set in “Static Island”—a
ctional society with a static population in which the members
grew ample amounts of rice and wine for all. Since it was “an
island with a heart,” the workers guaranteed xed rations for their
nonworking elders. Alas, as the number of retirees grew, Bu ett
showed, by simple math, that the workers would have to toil
backbreaking hours and give up wine for themselves to meet the
generous quotas legislated by their forebears.36
Most of his proposals followed the neoconservative tactic of
trying to harness people’s sel shness, rather than relying on their
“goodness.” Unlike his wife, Warren was wary of do-gooders. In
the seventies, Susie had befriended Larry King, an Omahan who
ran a credit union with the ostensible aim of providing credit to
blacks. King, who drove a white Mercedes, threw lavish parties,
and swaddled himself in gold watches, zebra skins, and a leopard
muumuu (all on a $16,200 salary), managed to con half of Omaha,
including Susie.37 But he did not fool Warren, who immodestly
remarked, “I knew that King was a phony and I think that he knew
I knew. I’m probably the only person in Omaha he never asked for
money.”38 By then, King was in prison for looting millions.
Another time, Susie asked Warren to help Charles Washington,
an Omaha civil rights activist. Warren was dubious but lent him

$24,900. Washington defaulted in six months. Warren felt so bad
about being suckered out of this tri ing sum that he took
Washington to court—the only time he had ever sued anyone.
On a national level, Bu ett was friendly with quite a few
politicians, such as Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Bill Bradley, and Bob
Kerrey. But, like few other executives, Bu ett did not try to curry
favor with them.39 The textile trade group repeatedly asked Bu ett
to help it lobby for import protection, but Bu ett never did, even
though his mill could have used the help.40
In a more dramatic case, Berkshire’s savings and loan was a
member of the United States League of Savings Institutions. The
league, like all such groups, viewed its mission as grabbing for its
members the biggest possible share of the government pie. It even
had the e rontery to lobby against requirements for stronger levels
of capital just as the S&L scandal was coming to light—that is, just
as its members were running up a $100 billion bill to the
taxpayers.
Bu ett and Munger, having the quaint view that even lobbyists
should have social consciences, quit the league in protest. Munger,
who had been warning of danger signs on the S&L front for years,†
to the press an acid letter accusing the league of “furnish[ing] selfserving nonsense.” If …
Because the League has clearly misled its government for a long time, to the taxpayers’

great detriment, a public apology is in order, not redoubled e orts to mislead
further.41

Though skeptical of government bailouts, Bu ett de nitely did
not share the neoconservative faith that marketplace judgments
were inherently correct. He did not subscribe to the now
fashionable view of the free market as the ultimate arbiter of
individual worth. People who did not have powerful jobs, women
in particular, noticed that Bu ett treated them without any hubris
or air of self-importance. Once, likening himself to his secretary,
Bu ett allowed that she

raises children just as well and contributes just as much to her community. Her talents

—and they are many—in a market society just are not bid up in the same way. Take
me and stick me in Afghanistan or someplace and we’ll nd out how talented I am.42

For a billionaire, he was quite radical. His politician friends were
Democrats, of course, but some of his ideas were far, far to the left
of theirs. Once, at a Q&A at Cap Cities, Bu ett was asked how he
would rewrite the tax code. “If I really could do it, it would shock
you,” he said. He’d tax the hell out of personal consumption—at
progressively higher rates—and impose an “enormous” inheritance
tax.
If I want to run around in a jet, which I do, ne, I have the claim checks to pay for it,
but that should be taxed heavily, because I am withdrawing people, fuel and so on—
resources—from society.43

Given such a liberal outlook, people could not understand why
Bu ett didn’t do more. Munger, who shared his skepticism of
philanthropies, was a generous giver and got heavily involved in
his hospital as well as in a private school. But Bu ett refused to be
enlisted. Norman Lear once asked Bu ett to make a brief
introduction at an award ceremony for a group called Business
Enterprise Trust. Bu ett contributed to the group, which honors
socially responsible businesspeople, and he was planning to be
there in any case. But he atly refused to make a presentation,
saying he got fty such requests a month. Lear was dismayed. He
added, disbelievingly, “It’s twelve steps to the podium for a thirtysecond introduction.”
From Bu ett’s viewpoint, everybody wanted a piece of him, like
camera-toting tourists pursuing a colorful native. His defense, as
Kay Graham recognized, was to set his own agenda, in
philanthrophy as in so much else. Holding on to his money was a
way of keeping control. Even as a boy, when he hadn’t owned a
part of Kay Graham’s newspaper but had merely delivered it, he
wouldn’t let his mother touch the money.

The adult Bu ett felt the same way about his 474,998 shares of
Berkshire.44 Bill Gates occasionally sold some of his Microsoft
stock, Lee Iacocca some Chrysler, and so on. But Bu ett would not
parcel o even a sliver of his brilliant canvas. Over a quarter
century, he had not sold a single share. The ironic result is that
Berkshire’s extraordinary growth did not put so much as a dime in
Bu ett’s pocket.
From society’s point of view, he argued that it was a good thing.
The dimes that he could give now were not merely dimes—to
Bu ett, they represented the quarters and the half-dollars that a
dime could become down the road. “When I am dead,” he
observed, “I assume there’ll still be serious problems of a social
nature as there are now.”45 He planned to leave his stock to Susie;
whichever one died last would bequeath it to the foundation.
Society would get a greater bene t from his money then, after he
was done heaping and piling. This was irrefutably logical, but
obsessive. By the late eighties and early nineties, Bu ett could
have been peeling o tens of millions for society’s “serious
problems” every year and still would not have diminished his pile
of chips by even 1 percent.
One wonders if his desire to control those chips related, at least
in part, to his desire to control not only his life, but also his death.
It is only human to hope, and perhaps to believe, that one will not
die in the midst of a great journey. In Bu ett’s “unfathomable
human mind,” his command of Berkshire may have provided a
sense of protection from that lifelong fear. Perhaps, like Lincoln,
he would not be called while the battle was still joined. And as
long as he continued to heap and pile the job would not be done.
* An exception: in 1982, Bu ett gave $100,000 to a library in West Point, Nebraska, named

for his maternal grandfather. More typical was a $400,000 gift in 1993 to the Columbia
University School of Public Health, which was earmarked for a family planning clinic.

† In a remarkably prescient forecast, six years before the scandal broke, Munger observed in
the Wesco letter for 1983 that “an agency of the U.S. government (F.S.L.I.C.) continues to
insure savings accounts in the savings and loan industry, just as it did before. The result may

well be bolder and bolder conduct by many savings and loan associations. A sort of Gresham’s
law (‘bad loan practice drives out good’) may take e ect for fully competitive but deposit-

insured institutions. ‘bold conduct drives out conservative conduct,’ there eventually could
be widespread insolvencies caused by bold credit extensions come to grief.”

Chapter 20

RHINOPHOBIA

As the memory of Black Monday faded, Wall Street basked in an
Indian summer. Stocks surged to new highs and deal-makers
hatched a fresh wave of LBOs, compared to which the earlier
waves had been no more than innocent ripples. The math of the
late 1980s was simple. Any company that exchanged its equity for
debt was immediately worth more, courtesy of the U.S. tax code.
And every company was thought to be ripe for such a maneuver.
In a sure sign that greed had overtaken fear, investment banks
had plunged into “merchant banking,” not only brokering LBOs
but buying companies themselves, with their own capital at risk. In
another sign, John Gutfreund, the traditionalist at Salomon
Brothers, had jumped into the game. This gave Bu ett and Munger
a window seat on the later stages of the deal era.
The two played the good-cop/bad-cop bit to perfection. When a
deal was proposed, Bu ett, the “good” director, would
diplomatically question Salomon’s bankers. Munger would try to
rip the deal to shreds. Of one proposal to buy a chain of gasoline
stations, which never made it past the board, a senior executive
said Bu ett and Munger “tore the presentation apart.”

Michael Zimmerman, the head of merchant banking at Salomon,
said, “Warren’s attitude was, if it didn’t make sense to do a deal
with equity it didn’t make sense to do it with debt.” Bu ett’s point
was that the bankers should focus on nding good businesses,
rather than on balance sheet reengineering. But by no means did
he oppose every deal.
In October 1988, on a Sunday evening, Bu ett, who was at home
in Omaha, got a call from Gutfreund. The latter was at his Fifth
Avenue apartment with a group of Salomon bankers. The previous
Wednesday, F. Ross Johnson, the swashbuckling boss of RJR
Nabisco, the maker of Winston and Salem cigarettes, Ritz crackers,
and Oreo cookies, had proposed to take his company private.
Johnson’s banker was Shearson Lehman Hutton, a subsidiary of
American Express. No sooner had this giant LBO been hatched than
every other house on Wall Street started scheming for a piece of
the action. Now, Salomon Brothers was mulling a competitive bid.
The group at Gutfreund’s wanted to know: would Bu ett, as a
Salomon director and big shareholder, give his blessing? And
secondly, would Berkshire put up $100 million of its own and join
the deal as a general partner?1
Unbeknownst to the bankers, Bu ett had placed an order for
RJR Nabisco shares in the past few days, on the heels of Ross
Johnson’s announcement.2 And, of course, Bu ett had owned the
stock in the early eighties. When Jay Higgins, Salomon’s top
investment banker, started to explain the company’s merits,
Bu ett’s Midwestern twang crackled over the speakerphone.
“Don’t tell me about the economics—I know they’re great. You
make a product for a penny, you sell it for a dollar, and you sell it
to addicts. And it has tremendous brand loyalty.”3
Bu ett and Munger had once come close to buying Conwood
Co., a Memphis-based chewing-tobacco maker. But they didn’t
want to be principals in tobacco, they had decided. Such thoughts
were on Bu ett’s mind as he talked to the bankers.
“The product—it’s got some problems,” he continued wryly. “I
don’t think I’d want it on my tombstone that I was a partner in it.”
But Salomon could go ahead without Bu ett.

The next day, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts launched a bid of its own.
Then Salomon joined forces with the Shearson-Ross Johnson team,
and a bidding war the likes of which Wall Street had never seen
burst into the open. The mother of deals was at hand, and the
merger fever, which had been so long in building, rose to a climax.
Now that the fever was at its apogee, no price was too much to
pay for an Oreo.
At the eleventh hour, KKR sweetened its bid by promising that
sometime after the deal had closed, it would “reset” the interest
rate on the junk bonds it sold to nance the LBO. The worse that
RJR Nabisco fared, the higher the rate that it would pay. (Imagine
buying a house with a “reset” mortgage: lose your job and the
interest rate doubles.) It is hardly a secret why KKR agreed to such
a deal. Regardless of how its investors fared, KKR would
immediately pocket $75 million in fees.4
Gutfreund had a chance to match the KKR “reset,” but to his
credit he refused. It cost his side the deal.5
Once KKR had it locked up, Bu ett bought more RJR Nabisco—a
short-term arbitrage (a bet that the deal would y). Berkshire
would make a fast $64 million on it.6 Given Bu ett’s well-known
criticisms, it seemed, to some, hypocritical of him. It did not seem
that way to Bu ett. Once a deal was on the table, he analyzed the
risks and rewards with his usual indi erence to anything but pro t
and loss. He also made arbitrage pro ts on Beatrice, Federated
Department Stores, Kraft, Interco, Southland, and other deal
stocks.7
But Bu ett, who had learned arbitrage from Ben Graham,
deviated from Wall Street’s arbitrageurs in one Graham-like
respect. As the action got hotter, Bu ett was less eager to go along.
Years earlier, at the Columbia seminar on takeovers, he had
warned that bankers using phony currency would one day push the
bidding to unsound levels. After the $25 billion RJR Nabisco deal,
he judged that this was a prophecy no more.
Deal-makers were nancing LBOs with “zero-coupon bonds,” a
type of funny money that enabled buyers to borrow huge sums and
defer their interest payments (and reality) for years. Given the

ease with which such scrip was printed—and the willingness of
investors to suspend disbelief—it is hardly surprising that deal
prices had made for the stratosphere. Quoting Bu ett:
Some extraordinary excesses have developed in the takeover
“Toto, I have a feeling we’re not in Kansas any more.”8

eld. As Dorothy says:

Bu ett wrote that in February 1989, just as the RJR Nabisco deal
was closing. He had made his pro t; now he wanted nothing more
of arbitrage. The deals were too unsafe.
Considering Berkshire’s good results in 1988, you might expect us to pile into
arbitrage during 1989. Instead, we expect to be on the sidelines.9

With the stock market soaring, Bu ett (who was just buying his
last Coca-Cola shares) was on the sidelines there, too. But he
needed someplace to put his cash. And this had become a much
tougher problem with Berkshire’s greater size. Ever since the early
years of the Bu ett Partnership, Bu ett had been prophesying the
day when the law of averages would nally catch him—
prophesying it, yet somehow putting it o . But as he warned his
stockholders, “A high growth rate eventually forges its own
anchor.”10 To have any chance of continuing his gravity-defying
act he had to put his money to work.
Such a compulsion to invest can be dangerous. It has been
wittily de ned as rhinophobia, an investors’ disease meaning “the
dread of ever having any cash.”* Bu ett admitted to such feelings;
having cash around was “an enormous temptation.”
There is an itch that comes about, and I get it, I confess. There is an itch to do things,
particularly when you haven’t done anything in a while.12

In the second half of 1989, Bu ett did something. In a sudden
spurt, he fashioned three big deals—with Gillette, USAir, and
Champion International—totaling $1.3 billion. As a group, they
were below his par. While Gillette, the world’s dominant razor
blade seller, was a typical Bu ett investment, USAir and paper

producer Champion were capital-intensive cash absorbers and not
at all the stu of his past success. (Champion had something in
common with his failures, though. Bu ett thought it might be an
in ation hedge.)13
In each case, Berkshire bought a new convertible preferred stock,
just as it had with Salomon Brothers. Save for Gillette, a consumerbrand company in the mold of Coca-Cola, Bu ett did not have a
strong opinion on the companies’ prospects.14 That is why he
structured them as convertibles (with xed dividends). Indeed, he
admitted, rather gloomily, “If I had four more Coca-Colas to buy, I
wouldn’t be buying these.”15
The threat of takeovers, once again, was behind these deals.
Gillette had been stalked by Ronald Perelman; USAir had been put
in play by Michael Steinhardt, a New York money manager; and
Champion was thought to be a target. “When you’ve got an able
management,” Bu ett told the Washington Post, “they should have
time to play out their hand.”16 Now each of those companies would
have Bu ett as its protective “gorilla.” In return, Berkshire would
get a xed coupon, on average 9 percent, and an option to convert
to common stock (a “lottery ticket”) if the shares should rise.
But Bu ett’s latest moves were unpopular. At Cap Cities, Bu ett
had bought the common stock, as anyone could, but in the new
deals, he had negotiated a special security, available only to him.
Linda Sandler, writing in the Wall Street Journal, charged that
Bu ett was pocketing rich coupons for Berkshire in return for
safekeeping the other CEOs’ jobs:
Many Wall Street investors say Mr. Bu ett’s special deals amount to a kind of

gentlemanly protection game. In the old days, these investors say, corporate raiders

such as Saul Steinberg got paid “greenmail” to go away. But Mr. Bu ett is getting
“whitemail” to stick around and hold management’s hand.17

Such sweetheart deals with the CEOs, so the argument ran, were
depriving the stockholders of the freedom to sell out in takeovers.
According to Forbes,

Bu ett gets a special deal, but so does management.… Put di erently, how much does
Warren Bu ett charge for takeover protection?18

Bu ett, of course, was not responsible to the shareholders of
Gillette, USAir, and Champion. He was supposed to make good
deals for Berkshire. But moralists get judged by tougher standards,
and Bu ett, suddenly on the defensive, seemed anxious to defend
the high ground. In a letter to his holders after the “whitemail”
deals, he argued:
… the other shareholders of each investee will pro t over the years ahead from our

preferred-stock purchase. The help will come from the fact that each company now
has a major, stable, and interested shareholder.…19

The trouble with this argument is that it assumes that every CEO
—or every CEO that Bu ett likes—will be deserving of protection,
and will deal fairly with the inherent con ict of interest. But not
every CEO is a Tom Murphy. Bu ett himself, at the Columbia
seminar, had argued that as imperfect as the takeover process may
be, ultimately, the decision had to be up to the folks who owned
the “little piece[s] of paper”—the stockholders.
Champion was a particularly dubious case. Andrew Sigler, its
CEO, was a vocal critic of takeovers and an active member of
Business Roundtable, a lobbying group for big business. At
Champion, he had poured money into the company’s mills but
failed to deliver for his shareholders. Over the previous decade, a
great one for stocks in general, Champion’s had risen by an
abysmal 3 percent a year. Even among other paper companies, its
return ranked as one of the poorest.20
The only person with much to show for Sigler’s poor record was
Andrew Sigler. In 1989, a lackluster year, Sigler paid himself an
$800,000 salary, plus “incentive compensation” of $425,000. In
addition, he took advantage of Champion’s depressed stock price to
award himself options on 31,000 shares. The next year,
Champion’s earnings fell by half. Sigler upped his take to $1.2

million, plus $28,000 so he wouldn’t have to pay for his personal
tax adviser, plus options on 47,000 more shares.
Bu ett, of course, had been a
erce critic of options,21
particularly when doled out to poorly performing CEOs. If anyone
had been desirous of taking over Champion, it’s hard to see why
Bu ett would have wanted to stop them.
The managements of Gillette and USAir were a di erent story.
USAir was building a national system with hubs in middle-market
cities, but had yet to consolidate. It seemed to have the sort of
strategy that warrants time and a little “protection.” Gillette, quite
simply, was minting money.
Although Bu ett’s terms were richer than what an ordinary Joe
could have gotten on open-market issues,22 the deals were not as
sweet as his critics claimed. Berkshire was locked into each security
for a decade, which on Wall Street is an eternity and then some.
Indeed, most money managers would have rejected Bu ett’s
“sweetheart” arrangements.
Nonetheless, the deals had an unwholesome aspect. They had an
odor of insidership—of Bu ett’s standing too close to his pals in
corporate boardrooms. It may be no coincidence that he bought a
swankier corporate jet that year, for $6.7 million. In his annual
letter, Bu ett went to lengths to poke fun at himself for this
singular perk (without alluding to his exceptionally modest
$100,000-a-year salary). He noted that if the cost of replacing his
plane continued to rise “at the now-established rate of 100%
compounded annually, it will not be long before Berkshire’s entire
net worth is consumed by its jet.”23 But the jet, which he wittily
dubbed the Indefensible, underscored the fact that he was spending
more time out of town and in very elite company.
By the late eighties, down-home Warren Bu ett seemed to know
everyone. He would jet out of town to a board meeting, or the
Super Bowl, or a party where he might run into Paul Newman or
Senator Edward Kennedy.24 He played bridge with the Corporate
America team, a celebrity CEO group, including a match against
members of Parliament at Old Battersea, the splendid seventeenthcentury London home of Malcolm Forbes. When Bu ett was asked,

during a talk, what nancial advice he might give to the President,
he could respond that, as a matter of a fact, he had been to a
dinner with President Bush the previous Saturday.25
Warren’s wife insisted that it was time for him to get some
“decent clothes,” as she told their daughter. When the elder Susie
was in Omaha, the two women dragged Warren to a store and
tted him into a $1,500 Zegna suit. The Italian-made Zegnas
became his uniform—a fetish like his Cherry Cokes and his jet. (But
he refused a salesman’s entreaty to order them custom-made,
preferring to drop into Zegna’s New York branch sans
appointment and buy a bunch at a time o the rack.)26
His new circle was astonishingly wide. In Boston, he would
hobnob with the likes of John Kenneth Galbraith and Globe editor
Thomas Winship. Winship said, “Warren’s a great collector of
friends”—an interesting comment about a guy who collected and
hung on to stocks. Bu ett had a gang in Washington, and another
in California. Susie and he would visit the Big Apple with a sort of
“program,” as one friend put it, to squeeze everybody in. “They are
not like other people,” she noted.
Bu ett’s inner circle—a group that included Graham, Loomis,
Murphy, Munger, and Ruane—was as before. But his friends in
Omaha, such as Dick Holland, noticed that he wasn’t around as
much. Verne McKenzie estimated that his boss was out of town one
or two days a week.
So uncontemporary in other respects, Bu ett jetted from coast to
coast like one of the glitterati. He dined at the Oscars with Dolly
Parton.27 He ew into Martha’s Vineyard for a gathering at Kay
Graham’s with the likes of Nancy Reagan and 60 Minutes
correspondent Mike Wallace.28 Another time, he picked up his wife
and swooped into Walter Annenberg’s Palm Springs, California,
estate, abloom in the desert with silver-leafed tamarisk trees and
sculpted shrubs. Sam Walton came, too.
Bu ett was popular in this crowd because he seemed to be
una ected by his money. He still spoke in homey expressions that
vaguely recalled the 1930s (“I’m on the wire” instead of “I’m on
the phone”). At the 1988 Winter Olympics in Calgary—where he

was a guest of Murphy and of ABC—Bu ett ducked an invitation
for lunch by the pristine Lake Louise to hole up in town and work.
At the Olympics, Agnes Nixon, a soap opera creator for ABC, met
Bu ett and decided he was “the reincarnation of Will Rogers.” She
invited him to New York to do a cameo on Loving, a daytime soap
opera. After the taping, Bu ett, Nixon, and others from ABC went
out to dinner at Bravo Gianni, an East Side northern Italian
restaurant. As they were leaving, Nixon noticed that John Kluge,
another billionaire, was exiting, too. Kluge ducked into a waiting
limousine while Bu ett stepped o the sidewalk and hailed a cab.29
Bu ett liked to portray himself as a sort of provisional traveler
in high society. He was full of stories that accented his supposed
innocence, such as one regarding a dinner party at which he found
himself seated next to Carolyne Roehm, the socialite designer, then
married to Henry Kravis. Roehm said, “Can you cut my meat for
me?” Bu ett didn’t know if this was a new form of upper-class
a ectation or—worse—a come-on. He ignored her the entire
evening—until, to his horror, as her barely nibbled roast was
carried away, he saw that she had a cast on her wrist.30
He liked his homespun image and seemed uncomfortable with
the reality that he now was something of a celebrity. After Bu ett
appeared in an episode of television’s Lifestyles of the Rich and
Famous, he was so embarrassed that he told people that the
producers had spliced it together without his having known about
it. But that was untrue. In fact, Bu ett had donned a microphone
and been formally interviewed.31
In 1989, Bu ett also was in the news in Omaha. Mrs. B—the carpet
woman—was stripped of her authority in carpets by her grandsons
Ronald and Irvin, who by now were running the Furniture Mart.
She quit the store in a rage, denounced Bu ett for selling her out,
and publicly called her grandsons “Hitlers.”32
In Omaha, the spat got the sort of attention elsewhere reserved
for Charles and Princess Di. Mrs. B accused her grandsons of being
spoiled ingrates who wasted their time in “meetings” and lived like

“millionaires.” Besides, she added poignantly, “It hurts when
you’re a nobody.”33
The ninety- ve-year-old dynamo spent a few months at home.
Then she opened a new store, “Mrs. B’s Warehouse,” adjacent to
the Furniture Mart—now her blood rival.
“It breaks my heart,” Mrs. B remarked one Sunday, motoring
past a sea of carpets in her new store. She added that she now was
working “for spite.”
Bu ett felt terrible about it. He took two dozen pink roses to
Mrs. B on her birthday to try to patch it up. But as a business
matter, he backed his management. Reporting on the unhappy
a air to shareholders, he praised Louie, Mrs. B’s son, as well as
Ron and Irv, as “outstanding merchants.”
Mrs. B probably has made more smart business decisions than any living American,
but in this particular case I believe the other members of the family were entirely

correct: Over the past three years, while the store’s other departments increased sales
by 24%, carpet sales declined.…34

Nonetheless, one has the sense that if Bu ett had been in Mrs. B’s
shoes, he would have wanted to go out the same way, kicking and
screaming—and that at some level he admired her for it. Shortly
after her break, he spoke about her with considerable empathy:
She hasn’t lost her marbles in any way, shape or form. She happens to be—

improperly, in my view—very negative on a couple of the grandchildren that work in
the store. Every now and then they want to take a day o with their families. Believe

me, they are marvelous guys, but they can’t work as hard as Mrs. B did.… It’s a
human tragedy in the sense that she couldn’t have a better family than she had. But
they had it easier than she did—nothing you can do about it.35

Mrs. B’s departure did not hurt Berkshire, which hit an all-time
high in September 1989 of $8,750 a share. But it is a strange truism
of Bu ett’s career that he felt most apprehensive during bull
markets. He was gloomy about the lack of opportunities, and
gloomy even about Berkshire.

His response was nothing short of brilliant. In a mirror image of
his deals with Gillette, USAir, et al., Bu ett raised $400 million by
selling bonds that were convertible into shares of Berkshire. The
people who bought this paper got a xed return and a “lottery
ticket” on Berkshire’s stock.
This time, Bu ett’s terms were sweeter than sugar. His interest
rate was only 5.5 percent. The low rate was a measure of the
investors’ faith that Berkshire’s share price would continue rising.
(They were betting on the lottery ticket.)
What’s more, since these were “zero-coupon” bonds, Berkshire
would owe interest, but not actually pay it, until the bonds
matured, fteen years later. But owing to a quirk in the tax laws,
Berkshire could deduct the interest all along, as though it were
paying.
And there was more. Berkshire could redeem the “zeros” in three
years. Thus, the investors were betting not just that Berkshire’s
stock would rise, but that it would do so in a hurry. Lost in the
shu e was the fact that Bu ett was making exactly the opposite
bet.
Two weeks later, in October, a proposed LBO of United Airlines
collapsed. Arbitrageurs—Bu ett had quit the game months beforesu ered huge losses. The stock market plunged 191 points in a day.
The junk-bond market crashed; the takeover game stopped in its
tracks. Within months, Drexel Burnham was dead. Wall Street’s
long love a air with debt was over. By early 1990, the Street was
in the tank, and Berkshire was under $8,000.
In his annual letter, Bu ett con rmed his gloominess, predicting
that Berkshire’s net worth was “almost certain” to drop (for the
rst time in his tenure) in one of the next three years. He tied
together Berkshire’s recent history and Wall Street’s current crisis
with a seemingly innocent thread: many of the now-toppling LBOs,
such as Federated, the corporate parent of Bloomingdale’s, had
also been nanced with zeros. Of course, Bu ett had a larger
theme in mind. On Wall Street, it was often the good ideas that got
you into trouble, for what the wise did in the beginning, “fools do
in the end.”36 Thus it was with LBOs and zero-coupon bonds.

As was his style in such essays, Bu ett started small and in the
distant past. He invited readers to “travel back to Eden, to a time
when the apple had not yet been bitten.”37
If you’re my age you bought your

rst zero-coupon bonds during World War II, by

purchasing the famous Series E U. S. Savings Bond, the most widely sold bond issue in
history.

Nobody called it a zero-coupon, but that’s what the Series E was.
The interest was paid in a lump sum, when the bond matured. The
ordinary Americans who bought the Series E were no fools. Since
the Treasury was the surest possible credit, they slept soundly,
knowing that their money was safely compounding at 2.9 percent
per annum.†
In the 1980s, investment banks invented a zero-coupon for large
lenders. These—like Berkshire’s—were rated Triple-A. Then the
bankers discovered that zeros and the equivalent pay-in-kind (PIK)
bonds could be used to nance LBOs. The appeal was obvious:
since no cash payments were required for years, bidders could be
induced to borrow any sum at all. Bu ett’s description rendered
this shell game suddenly self-evident:
To these issuers, zero (or PIK) bonds o er one overwhelming advantage: It is
impossible to default on a promise to pay nothing. Indeed, if LDC governments
[Mexico, Brazil, etc.] had issued no debt in the 1970’s other than long-term zerocoupon obligations, they would now have a spotless record as debtors.

Bu ett suggested that investors o er the bankers a taste of their
own medicine, a signature Bu ett stroke that made it intuitively
clear, even to a person on Main Street, that Wall Street was
dealing in extremely funny money.
Our advice … zip up your wallet. Turn the tables by suggesting that the promoter and
his high-priced entourage accept zero-coupon fees, deferring their take until the zero-

coupon bonds have been paid in full. See then how much enthusiasm for the deal
endures.

Such essays, though, were guides to the broad strokes; of his
strategy they revealed nothing. Indeed, Bu ett was a master
dissimulator.
At the very moment that his junk-bond critique was rolling o
the press, Bu ett was scooping up one of the largest bundles of
junk bonds ever—$440 million of RJR Nabisco paper. RJR
Nabisco’s bonds had collapsed with the general market, but in
Bu ett’s view, the market had overreacted. (After all, RJR Nabisco
was still selling a high-margin product to “addicts.”) His purchase
of junk bonds might seem hypocritical, but it was not. Bu ett saw
a moral hazard in selling a junk bond that would likely never be
repaid. Buying a bond was di erent. To the investor, no nancial
instrument was “evil per se”;38 it was a question of price.
After the purchase was disclosed, Dr. Benjamin Graham, the son
of Bu ett’s mentor and a Berkshire stockholder, wrote to protest
Berkshire’s investment in tobacco. Bu ett replied that while he
wouldn’t manufacture cigarettes, he had no problem with owning
traded tobacco securities—or, for that matter, a newspaper that
advertised the product. “I’m not sure that this is strictly logical,” he
admitted, but in a complex world, he deemed it a practical way to
draw the line.39
With Iraq’s seizure of Kuwait, in August 1990, the “credit crunch”
snowballed into a full-blown recession. New decades do not
necessarily portend new eras, but this one did. In the eighties,
spirits had run high. Bu ett, conversely, had hewed to caution. In
the nineties, Wall Street rediscovered fear. People who had lent
money wanted it back; companies that once could have borrowed
millions found the window slammed shut.
Corporate bankruptcies and junk-bond defaults (the “big bang”
that Bu ett had predicted at Columbia in 1985) lit up the map.
Fred Carr’s insurance company—stu ed with junk bonds—became
the biggest insurance failure in history. Banks, just reborn from the
foreign-debt crisis, found they were up to their ears in homegrown
deadbeats, such as LBOs and commercial real estate. A contagion

of bank failures moved like a storm front from Texas to Colorado,
New England, and the mid-Atlantic states. Serious people gathered
at investment seminars and discussed whether Citicorp or Chase
Manhattan would fail.
From Bu ett’s point of view—Bu ett and Fred Carr were always
out of synch—it was an ideal time to take a little risk. Berkshire’s
stock, it was true, had collapsed with the rest (its low for the year
was $5,500, down almost 40 percent from its peak). But it was at
such times that Bu ett was at his best. Rhinophobia might get hold
of him when prices were high. But when the world turned gloomy,
his instinct was deadly.
During 1990—the worst year for banking since the Great
Depression—Bu ett bought 10 percent of the stock of Wells Fargo,
the San Francisco banking giant. California real estate was just
beginning to turn down; the misery of its banks was expected to be
deep and long-lived. And Wells Fargo had lent more money to
California real estate than any bank in the country.
Bu ett, of course, knew that. Generally, Bu ett did not like
banks. An outsider had no way of gauging the soundness of their
loans until it was too late. But he had been pining for this bank for
years.40 Wells Fargo had a strong franchise in California and one
of the highest pro t margins of any big bank in the country. Its
chairman, Carl Reichardt, was a cost-cutter in the Tom Murphy
mold. During an earlier rough period, Reichardt had sold the
company jet—a sacri ce Bu ett could appreciate—and frozen the
salaries of the top brass. And Reichardt had largely avoided the
periodic fads, such as lending to Latin America, that had undone
other banks. As Bu ett knew, Reichardt and Paul Hazen, the
bank’s number two, had cut their teeth on property loans in the
1970s and had escaped the real estate debacle of that decade with
barely a scratch.
None of this meant that the outlook for Wells Fargo over the
next year or so was rosy. But Bu ett was thinking about a much
longer period than the next year or so. The bank was well
capitalized; it ought to survive the current trauma. Indeed, Bu ett
reported, a bad year “would not distress us.”41

And because other people were distressed, Bu ett was able to
pick up $290 million worth of stock at the re-sale average price
of $58 a share, or ve times earnings. That was down from a
recent high of $84.
After Bu ett invested, Wells Fargo’s portfolio began to take in
water. Wall Street wrote it o ; Barton Biggs, the chief strategist at
Morgan Stanley, said he had no idea if Wells Fargo would survive
and Warren Bu ett didn’t either.42 In the spring quarter of 1991,
Wells Fargo took a massive reserve against the possibility that
loans would not be repaid. Earnings plunged to twenty-one cents a
share, compared with $4.40 in the corresponding quarter a year
earlier. Bu ett responded with aplomb; in fact, he asked for
regulatory approval to double his investment.
Wells Fargo, by then, was the darling of short-sellers. It had
almost $15 billion in commercial real estate loans—two and a half
times as much, per dollar of equity, as its neighbor Bank of
America. Half of Wells Fargo’s real estate loans were in the terra
in rma of Southern California, the new fault line of American
credit. In Los Angeles, where the boom economy had turned to
bust, developers were quixotically racing to complete new
skyscrapers that they now had no hope of renting. In Orange
County, 22 percent of the o ce space was vacant. A bear on Wells
Fargo, writing in Banon’s, sardonically observed that the “Sage of
Omaha, Warren Bu ett” would be stuck with all that.43
Even many within Bu ett’s crowd saw the bet on Wells Fargo as
a breaking of the faith. Scott Black, a Graham-and-Dodd-style
money manager, said, “It upset me. Warren made a mistake,” as
though the heavens should have forbidden it. People who had been
appalled by the excessive leverage of the eighties had an emotional
stake in seeing the guilty get their just deserts—and real estate
lenders were “guilty.”
Bu ett also disapproved of excessive leverage, but he stripped
the emotion out of his calculations. At a certain price, he was
happy to buy a bank, or even a junk bond. During the height of the
gloom, a Manhattan friend called to “warn” him that the smart

money was saying that Wells could go under. Bu ett said calmly,
“We’ll see who’s right.”
Unhappily for Bu ett, the gloomy times were over all too soon.
When the United States opened re on Iraq, early in 1991, the
stock market rallied. The ghting ended in six weeks, but the rally
did not. By July, the Dow had broken 3,000. The combination of
more cash at Bu ett’s disposal and fewer places to put it could be
counted on to induce a new spell of rhinophobia. When Bu ett got
a call from James D. Robinson III, chairman of American Express,
he was all ears.
Robinson, the courtly son of an Atlanta banking family, was a
fellow Coca-Cola director and a social chum of Bu ett’s. An habitué
of boardrooms who held thirteen directorships, Robinson projected
a re ned, statesmanlike air. His dark-wood, river-view o ce
seemed to whisper “old money.” Personally, Bu ett was fond of
Robinson. What he thought of him as a CEO of American Express
was not so clear.
The company’s charge cards and traveler’s checks had remained
a very good business. During the most recent decade, their pro ts
had galloped ahead at an 18-percent-a-year clip. But Robinson’s
shareholders had never seen that 18 percent.
Robinson had frittered away the pro ts of this very good
business on a series of bad ones—in insurance, banking,
brokerage, even an art gallery specializing in nineteenth-century
American paintings. Eager to follow the 1980s fad for “ nancial
supermarkets,” Robinson had pumped a staggering $4 billion into
Shearson. But supervision was lax (Shearson “invested” $26 million
in a “conference center” at a Colorado ski resort), and the
investment bank had repeatedly needed bailing out. To make
matters worse, American Express had a habit of not coming clean
with the bad news until after the fact.44
Robinson had managed to elude the blame for such miscues,
partly thanks to his busy public relations department and partly
because he had stacked the board with captive directors. One such
captive, Henry Kissinger, pocketed $350,000 a year in consulting
fees from the management he was supposedly overseeing.

Despite Robinson’s good press, Bu ett was hardly unaware of his
record. In 1985, Bu ett had attended an American Express board
meeting, when the company was considering selling its Fireman’s
Fund insurance unit to a group that included Bu ett. Bu ett gave
the board some advice: it should sell Fireman’s to somebody and
focus on American Express’s one truly splendid business.45 A bit
later, when insurer GEICO bought a chunk of American Express’s
stock, Bu ett had called GEICO to express his concern. Though
Bu ett didn’t put it in such terms, Robinson’s record was a
compendium of the managerial sins that Bu ett had bewailed in
his letters.
But when Robinson called, all this was forgotten. Bu ett hopped
on the Indefensible for New York—seized, apparently, by one
thought: the memory of his investment in American Express a
quarter century earlier, which had been the rst big gusher in his
career. Now, as before, the company was in trouble. Just weeks
earlier, its credit had been downgraded. When Robinson asked for
a $300 million investment, Bu ett quickly agreed.
As Bu ett noted at the time, with the market at a high, he was
nding few things he liked, and he did like American Express’s
basic business. Still, it is hard to account for his saying “We’re
buying to be in with Jim [Robinson].”46 Bu ett’s friends were
stunned. He had even agreed—reluctantly, but nonetheless—to a
term that capped Berkshire’s potential upside. Jack Byrne, who
was an American Express director, told Business Week he would
have thought that Bu ett’s “genes” would have forbidden such an
agreement.47
When they spoke privately, Byrne realized that Bu ett regarded
his earlier American Express investment as a milestone in his
career and was eager to play a part in restoring the company.
Bu ett told him, “This is coming home again.” Of course, he had
also come home to GEICO and to the Washington Post He liked
these old shoes, just as he liked investing in the soft drink that he
had delivered as a boy. Replaying these ventures transported him
to a comforting time, when he had been young, and had had the
likely prospect of many more years ahead. It had also occurred to

Munger that his partner’s career was full of “odd coincidences.”
“Warren likes his past,” Munger admitted.
By August 1991, many of the recent additions to Bu ett’s portfolio
were troubled. Wells Fargo was on the verge of a disastrous
quarter. There was major trouble brewing at American Express,
which was facing a revolt by restaurants, a decline in the number
of card holders, and slumping pro ts.
Among the much-criticized “whitemail” deals, Gillette had
soared, enabling Berkshire to convert to common stock. Other
Gillette holders were also better o , since the stock was twice as
high as what Perelman had o ered for it. Peter Lynch, the mutualfund manager and a Gillette shareholder, said, “The deal with
Bu ett helped everyone.”
Few would have said the same of Bu ett’s deal with Champion.
Earnings had plunged by 85 percent, though Berkshire wasn’t
su ering, since its dividend was xed. Meanwhile, Sigler, the CEO,
had awarded himself options on 250,000 more shares at a price
well below the company’s book value.
USAir was doing worst of all. Almost on the day that Bu ett had
invested, a fare war had broken out. Then, in the wake of the
Persian Gulf War, air travel had collapsed. USAir found itself with
high employee costs at a time of intense cost pressure. It lost a
staggering $454 million in the year after Bu ett’s investment, and
its bleeding was far from over.
At one point, Seth Scho eld, the chief executive, called Bu ett to
apologize for the way his investment was turning out.
“Seth, I want you to remember one thing,” Bu ett shot back. “I
called you, you didn’t call me. So I have no one to blame but
myself if it doesn’t work out, and let’s let it go at that.”
Bu ett blamed himself in a deeper sense, too. He had understood
the dynamics of airlines—lots of competition, high xed costs—but
invested anyway. In public, he was up-front about this mistake.
With a touch of Will Rogers, he wrote to his shareholders, “No one
pushed me; in tennis parlance, I committed an ‘unforced error.’ ”48

It was easily his worst investment, and violated Bu ett’s own
guidelines. Ironically, the investment was probably a good thing
for other USAir holders, as it injected the deeply troubled airline
with much-needed capital.
These blemishes in Bu ett’s portfolio were easily outweighed by
the likes of Coca-Cola, Gillette, and the RJR Nabisco junk bonds—
on which he turned a fast pro t of roughly $200 million.49
Berkshire’s net worth continued to rise, in de ance of Bu ett’s
prophecy. And the stock rebounded smartly; by August, it was at
$8,800. What’s more, the problems at his companies did not
require Bu ett to get personally involved. He liked to say that he
had “arranged” his life so that he needn’t do anything he didn’t
like. In the summer of 1991, this was true. He said his biggest
worry was Nebraska’s upcoming game with Colorado.50
Bu ett’s broad defense of the whitemail deals—that the
companies would bene t from having “a major, stable, and
interested shareholder”—had yet to be tested. Perhaps it never
would be. But the controversy had faded. Even the rst one, oftentroubled Salomon Brothers, was enjoying a record year.
* The term is from Fred Schwed, Jr.’s quaint classic Where Are the Customers’ Yachts?
Schwed seemed to have known a Bu ett or two in his day. He observed that rhinophobia is

apt to strike “economical souls who do not believe in frittering away their money on food
and drink and momentary pleasure. If they play bridge of an evening for a quarter of a cent
and lose $17, they are liable to go home in a pretty depressed state of mind.”11

† One skeptic was Rep. Howard Bu ett, who in 1951 proposed a bill to protect holders of the
Series E bonds against in ation.

Chapter 21

THE KING

John Gutfreund runs an extremely good operation at Salomon.
WARREN BUFFETT,

BERKSHIRF HATHAWAY ANNUAL MEETING, 1991

Appropriately enough, the origins of Salomon Brothers lay in a
family quarrel. Ferdinand Salomon was born in Alsace-Lorraine,
where the Salomons were money brokers. He emigrated to New
York in the late nineteenth century and carried on the family
trade, arranging short-term loans for securities rms. At the dawn
of the new century, three of his four sons joined him. In those days,
Wall Street was open for half a day on Saturdays. Ferdinand, who
was orthodox, observed the Jewish sabbath; the sons insisted on
working. In time, their rift became irreconcilable, and in 1910, the
sons raised $5,000 and struck out on their own.1
Setting up shop at 80 Broadway, the brothers went from bank to
bank each morning, inquiring as to who had surplus funds and
placing these funds with brokers. Gradually, they moved into
corporate bond trading. Though its pedigree relegated it to a
backwater, Salomon Brothers soon discovered a client that did not
discriminate—the U.S. government. In 1917, Salomon became a

registered dealer in Treasury securities. Later, it would be said that
being a partner in Salomon was “the closest thing to being a
partner in the U.S. Treasury.”2 But the rm remained small for
many years. Two pivotal decisions would trigger its growth—and
ultimately, would bring Warren Bu ett to its door.
From its inception, Salomon was scrappy and sharp-witted.
Despite its humble origins, Arthur Salomon, one of the brothers,
was one of the few people on Wall Street with whom J. P. Morgan,
Jr., consulted. Once, while getting a shave, Salomon learned that
Morgan needed to see him. With his whiskers yet untrimmed, he
wiped the soap from his face and dashed to Morgan’s o ce. In
return for such obeisance, the House of Morgan occasionally tossed
a bone—such as a minuscule piece of a corporate bond
underwriting—Salomon’s way.
But Salomon was not content playing second ddle. During the
Depression, when the Morgans of Wall Street went on a “capital
strike” to protest against the newly created SEC, Salomon stepped
into the breach and got a toehold in underwriting.3 By such acts of
brashness, coupled with its partners’ willingness to risk their
capital, the rm prospered.
Such was its growing strength that by the postwar era, a
“marketable” bond was said to be one on which Salomon would
bid.4 But it was still a niche player. Though feared as a bond
trader, it remained an outcast in the snootier lines of underwriting
and investment banking.
In 1958, William Salomon revolutionized the rm in a single,
brilliant stroke. A second-generation partner, Salomon decreed
that each partner would have to leave his capital in the rm, save
for a 5 percent annual draw. Younger partners, often eager to buy
a home, would beg for an exception. The poised, dark-haired Billy
Salomon would turn them down.5 The partners’ fates were thus
intertwined, and a clannish spirit emerged. Moreover, the rm’s
capital, then $7.5 million, began to grow.
Salomon used its burgeoning capital to substitute for the
corporate relationships that it had never had. It muscled its way
into equities and investment banking, alongside the blue-blood

Morgans and Kidder Peabodys. As recalled by Bruce Hackett, who
was hired in 1968 as one of Salomon’s rst stock salesmen:
We were the last major house to get into research, the last to establish an investment

bank. It wasn’t based on being close to customers. It was based on being close to
markets. We were a pricing machine.

In 1979, IBM asked Morgan Stanley to relinquish its traditional
role as a sole manager of underwritings and comanage a $1 billion
debt o ering with Salomon. When Morgan refused, IBM stunned
the old guard by choosing Salomon to lead the underwriting.6
There was no more dashing from barber stools to take calls from
Morgan; Salomon had arrived. Its capital, by then, had soared to
$200 million.
By this time, Wall Street’s private rms had sensed the need for
capital and had begun to sell shares to the public. Billy Salomon,
who thought the discipline of the partnership was essential, was
vehemently opposed to selling out. His protégé John Gutfreund
agreed. Overhearing the partners discussing such a move one day,
Gutfreund brusquely cut in, “If you fellows are thinking of doing
anything like that I quit right now.”7
Gutfreund had grown up in the tony suburb of Scarsdale, the son
of a wealthy meat-truck-company owner who occasionally golfed
with Billy Salomon. Intellectual and withdrawn, Gutfreund
majored in English at Oberlin and considered a career in teaching.
When he returned from service in Korea, Billy Salomon invited him
downtown. Charmed by the energy of the trading oor, the stocky
young man took a job as an apprentice.
Working his way up through municipal bonds and syndicates,
Gutfreund became a partner at thirty-four. He guided Salomon
through a meteoric rise in underwriting, but was never quite one of
the boys on Wall Street. During the Vietnam War, a bearded
Gutfreund led a peace march through the nancial district.8
As if to compensate for being out of step, he developed a gru ,
even a crude, exterior. Once, at a black-tie reception, he was
introduced to Roland Machold, who ran New Jersey’s state pension

fund. Dissatis ed with the amount of business he was getting from
Trenton, Gutfreund blurted out, “Well, it ain’t worth fucking
around with the state of New Jersey.”9
Colleagues thought his rough language had a forced ring, as
though, armadillo-like, it was covering up a shyness. Gedale
Horowitz, a good friend at the rm, said, “John’s problem was he
didn’t want people to know he was compassionate. He couldn’t get
rid of the shell.”
Billy Salomon, who thought Gutfreund would outgrow his
bluster, tapped him to run the rm in 1978. Nothing could have
prepared Salomon for the day in 1981 when Gutfreund, Henry
Kaufman, and a third partner ew out to Salomon’s beachfront
home in Southampton, New York. Salomon greeted them in casual
slacks. His visitors were in pinstripes. They brought bitter tidings:
they were selling the partnership to Phibro Corp., a publicly
owned commodities trading rm. (Gutfreund had been reluctant to
sell, but had bowed to his colleagues.)10 Salomon’s seventy
partners reaped an average of $7 million apiece.
Though Gutfreund could not have imagined it, the road from
Southampton led inexorably to Omaha. Following the sale,
Salomon had access to capital in the public markets, and the rm
grew as never before. But the rm’s culture changed in ways that
could not be undone. The executives continued to call each other
“partners,” but that was a ction. Now they had no money in the
rm—no stake in it. “All of a sudden,” Billy Salomon recounted,
“you had guys with ve, six, ten million dollars. They were
watching their money as much as the business.”
Gutfreund assumed a dual chairmanship with David Tendler, the
chief executive of Phibro. But Salomon hit its stride just as
Tendler’s side of the business collapsed. Gutfreund promptly ousted
him. By the mid-eighties, not only was Salomon’s traditional bond
business soaring, but it was throwing its weight around in equities.
It led the pack in underwritings and was enthroned by Business
Week as “King of Wall Street.” Prophetically, the magazine added,
“if for some reason the company stumbles and pro ts dwindle,

Salomon is the kind of place where the long knives could come out
in a hurry.”11
Stumbling was the last thing on anybody’s mind. These were the
years when Gutfreund ran the company from a desk in the fabled
gym-sized trading room overlooking the Statue of Liberty. Short
and thick-lipped, he would stroll past rows of traders, trailed by a
vaporous cloud of cigar smoke. With his plum-sized jowls, he would
lacerate underlings in full view of their peers. “He’d take someone
to task,” a partner recalled. “He could turn you into a pile of shit
on the oor.”
Gutfreund was said to have dared his star bond trader, John
Meriwether, to bet $1 million on a single round of liar’s poker, a
game that traders played during lulls in the bond market. The
incident, described in Liar’s Poker, a best-selling insider’s account of
the rm, was probably invented, but it enshrined Gutfreund’s
image as a trader’s trader.*
When not playing poker, Meriwether’s bond wizards, some of
whom held Ph.D.s, made million-dollar bets on changes in interest
rates using complex trading formulas. Gutfreund encouraged them
to take risks and was manly about the inevitable loss. He inspired
not only fear, but also intense loyalty.
“It was striking how John dominated,” said Martin Leibowitz,
the house mathematician. “He would walk the aisles. The
electricity followed his path.”
Gutfreund’s towering pride su used the
rm. His traders
believed that a single moral lapse would be their last, and, indeed,
Salomon went unscathed by the insider-trading scandals that
sullied Drexel, Kidder, and Morgan Stanley. Imbued of old-school
ethics, Gutfreund turned away clients that he deemed unsavory
and rejected deals that he thought unsound.12
And yet, eventually, he caved in, just as he had on selling the
partnership. Giving way to his bankers, he let Salomon sponsor
LBOs of Revco and Southland and authorized a junk-bond loan to
TVX Broadcast. His vacillating—so at odds with his gru facade—
resulted in a trio of humiliating failures.

Underneath, Gutfreund did not really have control. Departments
were virtually unbudgeted. Salomon did not even have a chief
nancial o cer until 1987. When the bond market collapsed that
year, Gutfreund discovered—too late—that he had built a bloated
sta . Since going public, the rm had tripled to 6,800 people.
Gutfreund had poured capital into equities and investment banking
but had yet to earn a decent return on them. In an eerie
foreshadowing, he told the New York Times, “My problem is that I
am too deliberate on people issues.”13
His partners saw a pained quality to him, as in the doomed
gures in the histories he devoured. Surrounded by antic traders,
he strutted about the o ce like a stu ed bird. At a partners’ retreat
on Cape Cod, Leibowitz espied him alone, brooding over a drink.
When he asked what the matter was, Gutfreund said, “I can see my
job will require me to hurt people I don’t want to hurt.”
Struggling to get a grip, Gutfreund shook up the management
time and again. Lewis Ranieri, a close colleague, had been running
the mortgage department with virtual autonomy, as suggested by
his traders’ habit of winging slices of tomato across the trading
room. Gutfreund brutally red him. But Salomon boiled over with
rivalries between the lordly bond traders and the lesser-ranking
bankers and salesmen. Well-known stars, such as deal-maker Ira
Harris and bond-market guru Henry Kaufman, walked out. The
long knives came after Gutfreund, too. There was a plot to unseat
him, though it zzled.
At the heart of this Machiavellian in ghting was the annual
divvying up of bonuses. Gutfreund tried to hold them down, but he
was continually bullied by Salomon’s princes, archdukes, vassals,
and assorted subchieftains into raising the kitty.
His troubles were in amed by a seeming parallel between his
business and private lives. Coincident with selling the partnership,
Gutfreund had remarried, to a onetime Pan Am ight attendant
and determined socialite. Previously retiring, Gutfreund became a
Gatsby, and he and his wife spent an estimated $20 million on a
Fifth Avenue duplex, which became the scene of fabulously lavish
soirées. To top it o , Susan Gutfreund, blond and sixteen years her

husband’s junior, bought a pied-à-terre in an eighteenth-century
mansion on Rue de Grenelle, so that the Gutfreunds would have a
place to repose in Paris.14
The oft-repeated slap that she diverted him from Salomon was
undeserved, but she aggravated a strain between Gutfreund and
his partners, who felt they had to compete for the boss’s ear. Susan
even overhauled their cherished executive meeting room, ditching
their easy, bulky sofas for u y couches and antique ashtrays
without so much as a word. “It looked a like a French bordello,”
one partner groused. “I was walking around with a cigar in my
mouth and I didn’t know where to put the ashes.”
Increasingly, Gutfreund sought his counsel outside the rm. By
the late eighties, he was dialing Omaha a couple of times a week.
Bu ett, his biggest shareholder, was inevitably supportive, and as
Gutfreund confessed to Institutional Investor, he trusted Bu ett more
than he did his partners.
I view Warren as a resource. I go to him if I’ve got something that I can’t ask anybody

inside the rm about and get a reliable answer. Or, more than that, if I don’t trust the
answer that I can get in the rm to be truly objective. Warren is a terri c call.15

Bu ett had been a fan of Gutfreund’s since the latter’s role in
rescuing GEICO, in the mid-1970s. He had repeatedly cited
Gutfreund’s “integrity.”16 But he and Munger were aghast at the
chaos within the rm. They and the other directors did not even
get an up-to-date balance sheet.17
In 1990, Salomon Brothers’ pro ts plunged by $118 million.
When Gutfreund then raised the total bonus pool by $120 million,
Bu ett was appalled. Salomon Brothers was earning 10 percent on
equity pretax, far below the average of American industry. Its
stock was mired in the low 20s—unchanged from eight years
earlier (over which time the Dow had nearly tripled). Not a nickel
of value had been built for stockholders, yet bonuses had risen in
every year. As Bu ett might have put it, the investment bankers
were getting lavish “food stamps” at the expense of the

stockholders. This violated everything Bu ett believed in, and he
was extremely unhappy about it.
Late in the year, Bu ett met with the executive committee—for
him, a rare intervention in management—and told them to cut
back. “I don’t care how you pay it—you can pay it all to one
person,” said Bu ett, who was one of three directors on the
compensation committee. “But the overall number is wrong.”
Gutfreund, who for once did not have Bu ett in his hip pocket,
ordered his managers to submit lower numbers. But by the time his
underlords were through with him, Gutfreund had approved a
revised bonus plan that was $7 million higher.18 †
Bu ett voted against the bonus plan—a singular instance of his
voting against one of his managers. The other committee members
voted in favor, averting a showdown. But the news that Bu ett had
voted against Gutfreund rocketed through Salomon like a
thunderbolt. As Bu ett explained later, he feared that an irrational
pay scale was not a containable problem; such lopsided rewards
would tend to produce “irrationalities” throughout the rm.19 And
Salomon’s was very irrational; despite its poor results, no fewer
than 106 executives had made at least $1 million.
One trader in Meriwether’s elite bond arbitrage group had taken
home $23 million! Though the group, and the trader, had earned
immense pro ts for Salomon, news of his bonus raised an
egalitarian uprising among other young traders, who were getting
by on merely seven gures. In particular, Paul Mozer, the head of
Salomon’s government bond desk, went “ape-shit.”20
Mozer, given his thirty-four years, was in a position of
considerable trust. An intense man with narrow-set eyes and wirerim glasses, Mozer had grown up on Long Island and gotten an
M.B.A. at Northwestern University. He joined Salomon as a bond
salesman in 1979.
In 1988, after a two-year stint in Meriwether’s group, Mozer was
persuaded by Gutfreund to take over the government desk, a job
he said was “second best.”21 Nonetheless, he worked constantly. He
and his wife, who also worked on Wall Street, took an apartment
in Battery Park City, within walking distance of Salomon. He

installed a trading screen in his bedroom and customarily rose at
six to take a call from London. Mozer made $4 million in 1989 and
$4.75 million in 1990.22
Even for a trader, Mozer was uncommonly edgy. When John
McDonough, Salomon’s auditor, informed him that the government
desk was due for an audit, Mozer exploded.
“Look, my business runs ne.”
“Paul, you don’t have authority to say you don’t want to be
audited,” McDonough pointed out.
“Every fucking time we try to do something intelligent we get
beaten back,” Mozer stormed.
When Meriwether, who was Mozer’s superior, was told about the
incident, he chuckled, “You have to take Mozer with a grain of
salt.”23 But no one questioned Mozer’s dedication.
Mozer’s job was bidding for bonds at U.S. Treasury auctions and
trading the bonds after they were issued. Treasury securities are
the world’s biggest market, with some $100 billion in daily trading,
compared to $8 billion or so on the New York Stock Exchange. The
market was dominated by the “primary dealers,” a group of rms
chosen by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York with which the
bank did its trading. Though anyone could bid at a Treasury
auction, only the primary dealers could also submit bids on behalf
of clients. Thus they tended to know a great deal in advance about
the tone of the market. And of the thirty-nine primary dealers,
Salomon, the most venerable, took by far the biggest share of
bonds.
In return for its valuable imprimatur, Salomon, like the other
dealers, was expected to help the government oat its debt
smoothly and to keep o cials abreast of the bond market. Its
traders chatted with their peers at the Federal Reserve virtually
every day.
The relationship was informal, and something of a throwback to
a clubby, less regulated era of gentlemanly trust. Every quarter, a
group of dealers and investors, including Salomon, were invited to
the Treasury, where they were informed of the government’s
funding needs and asked for advice on how to proceed. (The

dealers were on their honor not to call their o ces or trade on the
news.) Then traders and bureaucrats would retire to the Madison
Hotel for dinner, customarily of lamb chops.24
Only at auctions were they on opposite sides, the dealers aiming
for the lowest winning bid, the Treasury seeking the maximum
price. Before each auction, traders such as Mozer frantically
canvassed customers to size up demand. Meanwhile, Salomon and
the other dealers stationed “runners” by a bank of phones in the
Italian Renaissance Fed building. Seconds before the one o’clock
deadline, the runners got their orders and wrote them out by hand.
They dropped the bids into a wooden box. As the clock struck one,
a Fed clerk put his hand over the slot.
This baroque system had successfully
nanced the U.S.
government debt since World War I. In 1990, the Treasury
auctioned $1.5 trillion of bills, notes, and bonds. The single hitch
had occurred in 1962, when a Morgan banker bid for half of an
auction of T-bills. The Treasury Secretary feared an attempt by
Morgan to corner the market; for obvious reasons, the Treasury did
not want to become dependent on only a few dealers.25 After that,
it imposed a 35 percent limit on awards to each account.
Usually, winners did not get that much, since awards were
prorated. But the canny Mozer found a loophole. Recognizing that
awards were limited to 35 percent but bids were not, he submitted a
bid in June 1990 for double the total of notes on auction. Even
after prorating, Mozer got the lion’s share.
Michael Basham, the white-shirted mandarin who was in charge
of the Treasury auctions, immediately called Mozer and told him
not to do it again.26 Not surprisingly, he assumed that was the end
of it.
But two weeks later, at a $5 billion bond auction, Mozer
submitted a bid for $10 billion. Basham was stunned; he could not
believe that a dealer would openly defy the U.S. Treasury, much
less the dealer that had been partaking of its lamb chops for threequarters of a century. Rejecting Mozer’s bid, Basham proclaimed
that bids, too, would be limited to 35 percent.

Mozer, as Charlie Munger would say, now began to exhibit
delusional behavior. He threatened to go above Basham to the
Treasury Secretary. Then he squawked to the press—a breach of
the gentlemanly code that infuriated the Treasury. Now alarmed,
Salomon higher-ups arranged a breakfast with Robert Glauber, the
Treasury undersecretary for nance, intending for Mozer to
apologize. But Mozer couldn’t pull it o ; he a ected an aggrieved
air.27 Salomon was so concerned that it ordered him to ring back
and say he was sorry. Then Mozer was shipped to London for a
brief cooling o .
But Mozer was in deeper than Salomon knew. At an auction in
July and again in August, Mozer had in ated his awards by
bidding on behalf of customers who had not, in fact, authorized
him to do so.28
Then, in December 1990, at an auction of four-year notes, Mozer
submitted a phony $1 billion bid on behalf of a customer, Mercury
Asset Management. A clerk was told, either by Mozer or by a
Mozer deputy, to “sell” the bonds from the unwitting Mercury’s
account to Salomon, as though Mercury had really bid for the
bonds and later sold them. To cover Mozer’s tracks, the clerk wrote
“No Con rm” on the trade ticket, so that Mercury would not be
advised of the trade.
Continuing in this pattern, in February 1991 Mozer submitted 35
percent bids for two customers—Quantum Fund and Mercury—
again without authorization, as well as a genuine bid for Salomon.
Salomon and its “customers” were awarded 57 percent of the
auction.
The Treasury, of course, had no idea that all of the bonds were
going to one party—in explicit violation of its rule. But in April, a
Treasury o cial reviewing the auction sent a routine housekeeping
letter to Charles Jackson, a Mercury executive. A copy was sent to
Mozer. One may imagine his alarm. The letter referred to
Salomon’s bid in February “on behalf of Mercury Asset
Management.” Mercury knew of no such bid.
Desperate to cover himself, Mozer called Jackson, coyly telling
him that the bid was the result of an error by a clerk, which

Salomon was correcting. He asked Jackson not to embarrass him
by responding to the Treasury. Jackson let it pass.
To play it safe, Mozer told Meriwether that he had submitted a
single false bid, and described his e ort to hush it up. Meriwether,
who was stunned, said it could end Mozer’s career.
“Is there anything else?” he inquired.
Mozer lied. He said it was the only time, and begged for another
chance.
A few days later, on April 29, Meriwether huddled with
Gutfreund, Salomon president Thomas Strauss, and general counsel
Donald Feuerstein in Salomon’s new headquarters, a massive pinkgranite-and-glass spire in the shadow of the World Trade Center.29
Gutfreund was shocked by what he heard.
“How could you misuse a customer’s name?” he wondered.30
Meriwether defended Mozer as a hardworking manager who had
goofed. Yet they knew that Mozer’s behavior was not completely
isolated. There had been his perverse battle with Basham, which
the group discussed, and his outburst at the company auditor.
Feuerstein said the false bid probably was criminal. Though not
required to do so, Salomon should report it, he thought. But
Gutfreund hesitated. He belabored the issue of whether to report to
the Treasury—an unpalatable option, in light of the Mozer-Basham
spat—or to the Fed. A phone call right then to Gerald Corrigan,
president of the New York Fed, would have ended the matter. But
perhaps they could break the news more gently in a personal visit.
The group agreed that Mozer’s misstep should be disclosed, but
didn’t decide who would do it or when. Remarkably, Mozer was
left in charge of the government desk.
Anyone else in Mozer’s shoes would have operated discreetly, at
least for a while. But discretion was not a part of Mozer’s
playbook. In May, at an auction of two-year notes, Mozer bid an
unexpectedly high price and was awarded an astonishing $10.6
billion worth, or 87 percent, to be split among Salomon and two
Salomon customers. This was clever, but too clever.
Many other dealers who had commitments to deliver the notes
could not get hold of them. They were “squeezed.” This set o a

scramble for the “May two-years,” and the price soared. Mozer
made about $18 million on the squeeze (in addition to $4 million
or so from his earlier, phony bids).
But traders complained—loudly and, in some cases, directly to
Washington—that Salomon had cornered the market. Squeezes are
not illegal unless a trader conspires to manipulate prices. Nor are
they uncommon. But the squeeze in May triggered widespread
losses and put a few traders out of business.31
The Treasury still knew nothing of Mozer’s false bids, but
Basham and his colleagues had been watching Mozer. Now, to
Basham’s amazement, he saw what looked to him like a brazen
attempt to manipulate the market by the Treasury’s supposed
partner.32 Just before Memorial Day, he tipped o the SEC.
As Washington busied itself with cherry blossoms, its
investigative machinery quietly began to churn. The SEC and the
Justice Department secretly began a probe of Salomon’s role in the
squeeze.33 Subpoenas went out to Salomon’s clients.
Meanwhile, the Treasury was getting heat from Rep. Edward J.
Markey, a subcommittee chairman who had heard griping from
traders. The Massachusetts Democrat was preparing a bill to
tighten supervision of the Treasury market.
Stephen Bell, Salomon’s profane but e ective Beltway lobbyist,
was worried about the legislation. When Bell saw press reports of a
squeeze, he knew it was trouble.
Dialing Salomon’s government desk, Bell, a New Mexican given
to cowboy boots, hollered into the phone, “What the fuck is this?”34
Mozer said Salomon had done nothing wrong. For nothing, Bell
thought, Washington was pretty upset.
Early in June, at Bell’s urging, Gutfreund paid a courtesy call on
Glauber, the Treasury undersecretary. Despite repeated reminders
from Salomon’s lawyer,35 Gutfreund still had not disclosed the
phony bid. But to do so now, when the Treasury was concerned
with the squeeze, would have been … well, awkward. Sitting
sti y, under the gaze of Glauber’s dark oil portraits, Gutfreund
defended Salomon’s behavior and o ered to be helpful. He did not

mention that the head of his government desk had lied to the
Treasury. Glauber wondered why he had come.36
Gutfreund may have hated to blow the whistle when Salomon,
nally, was enjoying a revival. And he now had the matter of
explaining his own delay. Like a witness who is too long silent, he
began to act as though he himself were guilty. He still intended to
disclose the bid, he con ded to Strauss, but he contended that it
was a “minor” matter.37 Incredibly, it did not occur to him that the
U.S. Treasury, Salomon’s oldest and most valued partner, might
see matters di erently.
Then, late in June, Gutfreund learned that Salomon was the
target of a civil—and a criminal—probe. He promptly hired the
law rm Wachtell Lipton Rosen & Katz to investigate Salomon’s
behavior in the squeeze. Yet he didn’t tell Wachtell Lipton about
Mozer’s false bid. Gutfreund was still tiptoeing, even with his
lawyer. Only on July 12, when a Wachtell Lipton attorney found
evidence of false reporting, did Salomon come clean.38
During the next month, Wachtell Lipton uncovered six bidding
violations. Marty Lipton, the rm’s senior partner and a Gutfreund
con dant, also advised Gutfreund that he had no obligation but
should make disclosure anyway. Gutfreund agreed. In his own
mind, he was doing—and had done—the right thing. He expected,
if not congratulations, at least a mu ed approval.39
On Thursday, August 8, Salomon gave its directors the news.
They got hold of Bu ett at an outdoor pay phone, next to a
restaurant in Lake Tahoe.40 What little Bu ett heard didn’t overly
concern him. Munger, who was dining at his cabin in Minnesota,
pushed harder for an explanation.41
The same night, Gutfreund and Strauss made the long-delayed
call to Corrigan at the New York Fed, giving him a sketch of
Wachtell Lipton’s ndings and mentioning that they had known of
one false bid for a while. Corrigan was cool. Gutfreund made
similar calls to SEC chairman Richard Breeden and to Glauber.42
On Friday, Salomon went public with a press release. But the
Wachtell Lipton attorneys, who wrote the release, had picked up
the habit of tiptoeing. They failed to mention that Gutfreund and

Strauss had known of an illegality for months. What the release did
say it said confusingly and incompletely. Nor did Gutfreund say
more to the sta . Salesmen and traders left for weekend homes
with the reassuring thought that the matter was contained to
Mozer and his deputy, who had kept his knowledge of a false bid
quiet. Both had been suspended.
On Monday, August 12, the tone changed. The Wall Street Journal
focused on the purported roles of Gutfreund and Strauss:
Said one person familiar with the rm: “It’s hard for me to believe—it’s inconceivable
—that [Salomon’s management] wouldn’t know how much was bid for.”43

The implication that Gutfreund had been in on the bidding was
incorrect. But reading those words, Gutfreund rightly sensed that
the spotlight would shift from Mozer to himself.
Immediately, he summoned Deryck Maughan, who chaired a
Monday meeting of Salomon’s investment bankers, and William
McIntosh, who ran the weekly sales meeting. Gutfreund told the
two to reassure the troops that the problem was “contained.”
Maughan and McIntosh did as told. But it was not contained.
Salomon’s stock opened lower. Worse, traders began to back away
from its commercial paper, the short-term IOUs that Salomon
depended on to fund its operations.44
By the end of the day, markets were awash in rumors. McIntosh
confronted Gutfreund and Strauss again; now they admitted that
there were more violations—and that they had known of one since
April. McIntosh, a balding veteran of thirty years, boldly suggested
that Gutfreund resign.45 Gutfreund refused, but allowed that if
McIntosh thought he could write a better, second press release, to
give it a try.
On Tuesday, McIntosh called Maughan. “Deryck, I found
something out and I’m terribly uncomfortable,” McIntosh began.
“You’re the one person I can trust.”46
Maughan, a Britisher, had built Salomon’s Tokyo o ce into a
major pro t center. He had recently been called back to New York
to revive the corporate nance department. A coal miner’s son,

educated at the London School of Economics, the forty-three-yearold Maughan was already thought to be Gutfreund’s likely heir.
The day before, Maughan had vouchsafed for Gutfreund’s
integrity. Now both he and McIntosh felt they had been
sandbagged. His cheeks reddening, Maughan called Zachary Snow,
a Salomon attorney who worked for Feuerstein.
“Zack, I need to talk to you. I need facts. If you don’t come,
that’s a message.”
Meanwhile, a letter from the Fed was being hand-delivered to
Gutfreund. Corrigan also needed facts—and hinted that Salomon’s
primary dealership was in jeopardy. Alarmed, Gutfreund and
Strauss called Corrigan, and found him in an unfriendly state. The
beefy central banker was furious that a scandal had broken on his
watch. Even during that call, Corrigan felt that he was getting the
facts “in dribs and drabs.”47 He is said to have hu ed at Strauss,
“How could you do this to me?”
Salomon’s brass regrouped Tuesday night at Wachtell Lipton.
Amid some heated arguing over Gutfreund’s culpability, the
executives drafted a second press release. This one weakly
admitted that “senior management” had had prior knowledge.
Then Munger came on the line and said, “Let’s not just say ‘senior
management.’ Let’s say who!”48 That settled it.
A week before, Gutfreund had been Wall Street’s most feared
executive. By Wednesday, his career hung by a thread. The
disclosure that he had known of a violation in April—and had left
Mozer in place for further mischief—set o a chain reaction. In the
minds of regulators, lawyers, reporters, and Salomon’s own
employees, the rm began to resemble the still-fresh corpse of
Drexel Burnham, which had collapsed after a lengthy battle with
the government the previous year.
On Thursday, customers began to desert. The Wisconsin
investment board cut Salomon o . Moody’s announced a possible
downgrade. Corporate clients told Salomon not to bother calling
until they saw a change at the top. Gutfreund, who was cloistered
with loyalists on the forty-third oor, had become a leper.

Thirteen oors below, the closely cropped Maughan was issuing
makeshift orders like a platoon sergeant cut o from his command.
But Maughan could not calm markets. Salomon’s stock had
dropped from 37 to under 27 in a fortnight. The bond market, too,
had turned on its former king. Salomon’s medium-term paper had
plunged from 60 points o the Treasury curve to 300 points o .49
Its credit was unraveling. People were telling Maughan that he had
to call Bu ett—whom he had never met.
On Thursday night, Corrigan and Gutfreund spoke again. This
time, Corrigan made it clear that he was preparing to yank
Salomon’s status as a primary dealer.50
People in high places, especially those with pieds-à-terre in
Paris, may nd it hard to fathom that the bell can toll for them.
Certainly, Gutfreund had never imagined that he could be
jeopardized by Mozer’s petty machinations. But without Corrigan,
he doubted that he could go on.
On Friday, Gutfreund awoke to see his picture atop the New York
Times. It occurred to him that he was looking at his obituary. At
six-thirty, he phoned Corrigan, who did not discourage him from
quitting. Then he called Lipton, who was shaving. Lipton, always
eager to help his friend—though Salomon, not Gutfreund, was his
client—pleaded with him to reconsider.
The once and sometime king sped to his o ce. Shortly before
seven, Omaha time, he called Bu ett at his home, waking him.
Gutfreund said he had decided to quit—it was his decision alone—
and wanted Bu ett to step in.
Bu ett hesitated. He had always been careful to avoid such
entanglements. In Omaha, he had his life neatly arranged. Once,
when Tom Murphy was on the verge of acquiring ABC, Bu ett had
cautioned, “Think about how it will change your life.”
Undoubtedly, he now had the same thought about himself.
“You got to come to New York,” Gutfreund insisted. “I just read
my obituary. Look at the paper.”
“Well, let me think about it.”51
Bu ett showered, dressed, and cruised the familiar route to
Kiewit Plaza. In his mind, he ran through Salomon’s balance sheet.

He knew that it had $150 billion or so of assets, only $4 billion of
which was equity. Salomon had more liabilities than any company
in the United States save Citicorp. Then Bu ett began to think
about Salomon’s intangibles. The business was making money—as
a business, it wasn’t going broke. The crisis was that top management
was being eliminated overnight, in a business where con dence is
enormously important.52 The directors would be meeting Sunday to
accept Gutfreund’s and Strauss’s resignations. They would need
someone to take the reins.
Bu ett’s con dants were skeptical as to whether he should do it.
Ron Olson, his lawyer at Munger, Tolles & Olson, warned that it
was “a very high-risk proposition,” and that Bu ett’s reputation
would be forever damaged if it turned out badly.53 Howie
prophetically told his father, “Everybody who ever wanted to take
a shot at you is going to do it now.”
The safe course would be to give Salomon a quiet burial. True,
Bu ett had a $700 million investment in Salomon preferred. But
the preferred stock was far safer than the common; neither Munger
nor Bu ett thought they would lose much money in a liquidation.54
But Bu ett stood to lose something nonetheless. His entire
career, he had argued for a sort of compact between shareholders
and corporations. Gutfreund had failed the trust, through weakness
and hesitation. But the compact worked both ways. As Salomon’s
biggest owner, Bu ett also had responsibilities. He had a duty,
which at the extreme resembles fate.
By midday, Bu ett was aloft in the Indefensible, racing toward
New York.
For most of that Friday, trading in Salomon’s stock was halted.
Its ordinary business stopped. The top executives huddled in the
boardroom. Gutfreund came in at noon and said, “Warren is the
CEO.” The others hung around, waiting. According to Maughan:
The whole rm had put down their phones. They knew there was a meeting of the
o ce of the chairman going on. We had this curious suspended animation while we
were waiting for the CEO to get here on his plane.

The executives knew they were days, perhaps a week, from
seeing the rm go down the tubes. They were beady-eyed and stale
from too many meetings. Donald Howard, the chief nancial
o cer, said, “We were in a state of shock.”
Late in the afternoon, Bu ett poked his head into the boardroom
and gave a hearty “Hi there.” He managed a joke about “the little
problem we have,” as though the rm had lost a valued attendant
in the mailroom. Thinking aloud, he added, “I’m really sorry about
John and Tommy. Is there any way we can save JM
[Meriwether]?”55
Bu ett knew none of the details of the scandal, for which he
would now be responsible. But he made no attempt to grill
anyone. Glancing about the boardroom, he said it was obvious that
people were tired and should get some rest. His relaxed manner
had a calming e ect. For the rst time in a week, the executives
felt their spirits lift.56
“This is only a temporary setback.”
He said it as if he knew.
Then Bu ett went to the auditorium for an assembly of
Salomon’s managers. Gutfreund spoke rst. He said the rm was
fortunate to have Bu ett stepping in, and that Gutfreund would be
rooting for them. He did not show sentiment—only a hint of the
old de ance. He had committed no crime; now he was gone.
Leibowitz thought his dour farewell was “horribly sad.” Richard
Barrett, an investment banker, said it was “pure John—making a
bad moment worse.” Nobody forgot Gutfreund’s nal words.
“Apologies,” he said, “don’t mean shit.”
After a pause, Bu ett faced the troops for the rst time. They
had seen their rm brought to its knees. They were desperate for
leadership, but unsure of where they wanted to be led. Now,
Bu ett told them, Salomon Brothers would have to do more than
obey the rules. His standard would be far stricter.
“Anything not only on the line, but near the line, will be called
out.”57
It was a warning but also a challenge, evoking a mu ed
memory of the rm’s long-lost pride. According to witnesses cited

in the next day’s Times, it was what they wanted to hear:
After Mr. Bu ett’s discussion, in which he told the managing directors that the rm

would have to follow the laws closely, the rm’s executives burst into applause for
the man who would soon be their chairman.58

* Eric Rosenfeld, one of Meriwether’s traders, says he witnessed the incident, and that it
involved Meriwether and John O’Grady, a veteran salesman, since deceased. After O’Grady
repeatedly challenged Meriwether to play him during a busy day of trading, Meriwether
dared him to one round for $1 million, “no tears.” Meriwether beat him, in front of a group

of spectators. According to Rosenfeld, the bet was clearly in fun. Gutfreund, he says, was not
present. However, Gutfreund frequently did play liar’s poker with other traders, though for

less impressive stakes. “He never played during the middle of the day,” Rosenfeld said.

Michael Lewis, the author of Liar’s Poker, later attributed his account to Meriwether, “among
others.” Meriwether and Gutfreund both denied Lewis’s version.

† Gutfreund also instituted a useful reform, according to which a signi cant portion of
bonuses would be paid in stock.

Chapter 22

SALOMON’S COURT

I—Crisis
Friday evening, Bu ett leaves Salomon with Gutfreund and
Strauss. Their limousine snakes through the nancial district,
pushing against the six-o’clock tide of homeward-bound
commuters. At the Federal Reserve, Corrigan greets them austerely.
Stressing that Salomon’s dealership is at risk, he makes clear he
wants not just the phony bids cleared up but a broad reform. He
has had it with Salomon’s swagger. Bu ett pleads for time.
Otherwise, he is contrite as a fallen samurai.1
In the morning, Bu ett reconvenes with a dozen of Salomon’s
brass at the midtown o ce of Wachtell Lipton. Eyeing the group—
some of whom he has never met—he coolly announces that he
intends to pick one of them to manage the company.
“I’m going to meet with you one at a time,” Bu ett declares. “I’ll
ask you all the same question: ‘Who should run this rm?’ Come in
any order you like.” Then he walks into an adjoining room and
shuts the door.2
All but two of the executives nominate the same man. Maughan
says, “I’m afraid it may have to be me.”

When Bu ett reappears, Lawrence Pedowitz, a Wachtell Lipton
partner, gives a brie ng on the Mozer case. Bu ett asks about
Meriwether. The general view is that Salomon’s top producer has
done nothing wrong but that, given the cry for a clean break, he
may have to go. Later, Bu ett sees Meriwether in private. “JM”—
the rst incidental casualty—resigns.
Now, Saturday night, the scene shifts to Christ Cella, a bustling
steakhouse on Manhattan’s East Side. Bu ett, Munger, and
Gutfreund are dining. The latter o ers his consulting services,
gratis. Bu ett graciously responds that he will need all the help he
can get. The King of Wall Street lifts his glass and toasts to the new
regime.3
Cut to ten o’clock Sunday morning, outside 7 World Trade
Center. The directors push through a phalanx of photographers and
head for the boardroom on the forty- fth oor. But events are
moving ahead of them. As they gather around the burled-walnut
table, the directors learn that the Treasury has just banned
Salomon from its auctions.
The board meeting is disjointed. One director is participating via
a speakerphone at a lodge at Mount McKinley. Another is on the
phone from Maine. Bu ett repeatedly darts out to take calls from
government o cials, including Nicholas Brady, Secretary of the
Treasury, Jerome Powell, the assistant secretary, and Corrigan,
who are also in conference with one another and with Fed
chairman Alan Greenspan.4 Bu ett pleads with the regulators for a
show of grace, and he reminds them that Salomon’s king-sized
$150 billion balance sheet is almost entirely nanced with shortterm money. It rolls over an astounding $50 billion every day, of
which $1 billion is secured only by Salomon’s name—a rapidly
depleting asset.5 If it cannot re nance, it will have to liquidate. At
this very moment, Wachtell Lipton is preparing bankruptcy
papers.6 Although it is morning in New York, the opening of
markets in Tokyo is only hours away. Bu ett is afraid that the
Treasury’s banishment of Salomon will trigger a funding crisis in
Japan and, ultimately, the rm’s collapse.7 He needs some
evidence that Salomon—or Bu ett—has the government’s faith.

Meanwhile, as news of Salomon’s expulsion ashes over the
wires, employees drift onto the trading oor, like family members
awaiting the last rites of a relative. Eric Rosenfeld, a bond trader,
Lawrence Hilibrand, the $23 million arb, and McIntosh are going
over options for emergency funding. Maughan is talking to Japan.
John Macfarlane, the thirty-seven-year-old treasurer, having just
nished a triathlon, has raced to the o ce. He is trying to gure
out how much cash Salomon will need in the coming days. Above
the vast trading room, a trio of electronic clocks tick o the
seconds in New York, London, and Tokyo. “Your life,” Macfarlane
says, “ ashes in front of you.”
In the boardroom, Gutfreund has resigned, and Bu ett has taken
control. His sense of humor has left him, but he is running the
meeting with his customary calmness and sense of purpose.
Dwayne Andreas, a director, takes heart from the fact that Bu ett
has so much of his own money invested in Salomon. Another board
member is cheered by the thought that Bu ett, at least, knows the
government o cials personally. For varying reasons, each of the
directors is convinced that Bu ett is the one person who has the
combination of reputation, nancial clout, experience, and inner
strength to save the rm.8 All of his prior career—particularly, his
habit of making lonely decisions—now seems but a preparation for
this moment.
But Bu ett is not certain that he wants the job. If Salomon
remains on the Treasury’s blacklist, Bu ett will be little more than
Salomon’s undertaker. Munger is vehement that Bu ett should
refuse such an assignment.
Around midday, Secretary Brady calls. As Bu ett ducks out of the
boardroom, Munger snarls, “You’d be crazy to take it!”
Brady is at a summer home in Saratoga, where he has been
trying to assess the damage to markets if the biggest rm on Wall
Street fails. Bu ett takes the call in a side room with antique
pottery and lavender walls. He ticks o the changes at Salomon:
Mozer
red; Gutfreund and Strauss resigned; speci c new
procedures to prevent a recurrence. In addition, Bu ett delivers a
personal promise to clean house thoroughly:

I told him there were going to be controls that he could hold me responsible for in the
future.… Similarly, that we were planning a future that would be considerably
di erent than our past.9

But if the Treasury cuts Salomon o , Bu ett adds, it may not make
any sense for him to become its chairman.10
Brady understands that Bu ett has issued a threat, but his
instincts tell him that Bu ett is not a quitter. “He has never walked
away from any investment before,” Brady tells himself.11
Brady is relatively unperturbed by the prospect of Salomon’s
demise. The system has survived Black Monday, the collapse of
Drexel, and similar traumas. “No one is bigger than the U.S.
government,” Brady thinks.12
But Brady, of course, knows Bu ett. He is the same Nick Brady
who, as a Harvard M.B.A. student, wrote a thesis on his family
rm, Berkshire Fine Spinning. Though he sold his stock before
Bu ett’s arrival, he is all too aware of what Bu ett has done with
it since. In recent years, Brady has rubbed shoulders with Bu ett at
Katharine Graham’s dinner parties and, like Graham herself, has
occasionally called Bu ett for a “reality check.” Though shrugging
o what he regards as Bu ett’s blu , he puts immense stock in his
promise to clean up Salomon Brothers. The call breaks o without
resolution.
The board meeting lurches on until midafternoon, when Bu ett
is due in the auditorium for a press conference. As he exits the
boardroom he collars Deryck Maughan. “You’re the guy,” he says
with a nod. Salomon, the colossus of Wall Street traders, is now in
the hands of a Midwesterner who once proposed a 100 percent tax
on short-term trading and a onetime British civil servant and
career administrator.
Introducing himself and Maughan to the press, Bu ett explains
that he will be an interim, unsalaried chairman, for as long—but
only as long—as it takes to get Salomon out of trouble. Then he
delivers a bit of good news: Brady has just reversed himself and
announced that Salomon may bid at Treasury auctions for its own

account, though still not for customers. This is a limited but hugely
important reprieve.
Softening up his inquisitors, Bu ett says he is ready to take the
reporters’ questions and will “attempt to do it in the manner of a
fellow that has never met a lawyer.”13 Bu ett still has only a
sketchy outline of the scandal. But elding questions, he is in his
element, uid and witty as at his annual meetings. Now contrite,
now gently remonstrative, Bu ett already has a strategy. He wants
to apologize for the past, but also to disassociate it from the future.
REPORTER
BUFFETT

:

REPORTER
BUFFETT

: I am curious if you have read Liar’s Poker?
Yes, a long time ago.
: Any book review?

:

No. I want to make sure there is not a second edition.

The pressing question is whether Salomon’s culture is to blame—
whether Mozer is merely a symptom. Bu ett defends Salomon as
generally honorable. It was not “pouring out criminal acts in any
way, shape or form.” Still, he recognizes that the question of
motivation is inherently obscure, and that the culture may have
played a part. “I don’t think the same thing would have happened
in a monastery,” he admits.
The most delicate interchange concerns Gutfreund. Bu ett
declares that his silence regarding Mozer was “inexplicable and
inexcusable.” But otherwise, he does not back down from his
previous, admiring characterization of his friend.
REPORTER

BUFFETT

:

Do you think you misjudged Mr. John Gutfreund, and do
you regret having invested in Salomon Brothers?

: The answer to both of those is “No.”

Bu ett’s three-hour performance goes over well. The press
conference over, he pops into a room with the senior executives
and delivers an unmistakable message. “Deryck’s running this rm,
so don’t call me. He decides who gets promoted and who gets red.
That’s all—see ya.”14
Then he departs for the nearby Marriott Hotel. In one day,
Bu ett has had a taste of regulators, the press, the executives, and
the sta . Saving Salomon will require that he satisfy each of these
constituencies—and the company’s customers and creditors, too. In
the recent past, no investment bank that has wrestled with such a
crisis has managed to survive.
II—Wartime
“For Salomon, the tough times are only beginning,”15 Monday’s
Wall Street Journal intoned. One might have asked why they were
beginning. The crime had been foiled; the perpetrator was gone.
Yet the Journal proved sage. In Washington, regulators pledged a
full-scale probe. Salomon’s debt was downgraded. The
rm
remained frozen out of commercial-paper markets. And more
customers—Connecticut, Massachusetts, the California Public
Employees Retirement System, and the World Bank—cut Salomon
o . Individually, these blows were glancing, hardly worthy of
advancing a plot. Yet stitched together they wove a familiar
thread. To wit, a “scandal” was in progress, and it had transformed
Gutfreund’s bond house into a pariah.
Bu ett struck back on several fronts.
Early Monday, he distributed his home telephone number to
Salomon’s top managers, with a letter instructing them to call him
at any sign of further misconduct. Though largely symbolic, this
was a characteristically simple and powerful stroke. Most CEOs do
not like to be called at their homes.
The same day, he and Munger went to see Richard Breeden,
chairman of the SEC, the lead agency investigating Salomon.
Breeden, a regulatory hawk, was trying to expand the SEC’s
jurisdiction into the Treasury market. In keeping with his macho

reputation, he warned his visitors that he was prepared “to dig up
an entire beach looking for a grain of sand.”
“Call us anytime someone doesn’t give you what you want,”
Bu ett replied evenly. “You’ll have a new person to deal with in
twenty minutes.”
Breeden was impressed.16
Returning to New York, Bu ett took steps to generate cash.
Salomon hiked the interest rate that it charged its traders, inducing
them to sell securities. By the end of the rst week, a companywide liquefaction of assets was in progress.17
Then Bu ett demanded that Feuerstein, the general counsel
under Gutfreund, resign. Bu ett implored Robert Denham, a
partner at Munger Tolles in Los Angeles, to drop his practice and
replace him. The squeaky-clean Denham had been Bu ett’s lawyer
on Berkshire matters for fteen years. “Bob, I really need you,”
Bu ett said. Denham felt he couldn’t refuse.
The biggest worry was the threat of prosecution by the Justice
Department. Bu ett knew that Salomon wouldn’t be able to run its
business while ghting an indictment, and he gured that the rm
would be nearly as devastated were it to plead guilty to one.18
(Many duciaries are forbidden from doing business with felons,
and few would choose to do so.) That left one hope: play ball with
the government so fully that Justice might grant a reprieve.
Wachtell Lipton deduced that this was “a real long shot.”19 The
government rarely passed up a chance to prosecute a highvisibility case.
But the strategy was the only one Bu ett could have followed.
Instinctively, he shrank from confronting his adversaries, but he
was superb at winning them over without a ght. He did not so
much convince; he disarmed, he co-opted. Though fearful of
hostility, he knew what many are slow to learn—that a sustained
demonstration of good faith is apt to be returned in kind, if it is not
undermined by any con icting behavior. That is how he had induced
Kay Graham to trust him, and Stan Lipsey to go to Bu alo and
save his newspaper; and the SEC to drop its investigation of Blue
Chip. Now he had to cooperate with Salomon’s investigators, bow

down before its accusers, actually help Justice prove its case. He
had to assume, very publicly, as only Bu ett could, a personal
responsibility for the scandal—to show that the stain was not only
purged but deeply and sincerely regretted.
There was a political element to the case, and the political
climate was overtly hostile. The public had been predisposed—by
previous scandals, and by Liar’s Poker—to believe that all of
Salomon was rotten. Also, regulators and many in Congress, who
were embarrassed at having slept through the S&L asco, viewed
the Salomon case as an opportunity to demonstrate their
“toughness.” Their outrage seemed to run ahead of the revelations.
Rep. J. J. Pickle, a Texas Democrat investigating Salomon, actually
issued a statement declaring, “My fear is that this isn’t the only
runaway train on the tracks, and that the real wreck [at Salomon]
is yet to come.”20 At the SEC, Breeden was treating the Salomon
a air as a replay of Drexel, and had dashed o 135 subpoenas and
requests for information.21
Compared with Boesky or Milken, Mozer, of course, was very
small beer. But his blunt de ance of the Treasury was the picture
of Wall Street arrogance—and arrogance, more than any speci c
crime, is what turned the public’s stomach. In one respect, Salomon
was the most arrogant of all. “We screwed around with securities
of the U.S. government,” noted Gedale Horowitz, a longtime
Salomon executive. “Not even Milken did that.”
As summer wound down, Washington was abuzz over “the
Salomon scandal” as only Washington can be. Rep. Markey,
having booked a hearing for two days after Labor Day, had bagged
Bu ett as the star witness. The Senate had scheduled a hearing for
a week later.
Bell, Salomon’s capital lobbyist, shrewdly took Bu ett to see
some of his interrogators in advance. A few had tough questions
about the Salomon board’s lack of oversight. Bu ett said, you
know, he wished he had paid more attention to it at the time. He
was humble, sort of hat-in-hand, laying on that killing kindness.
He reminded them that he was a congressman’s son, and poked fun
at the fact that he had gotten himself in a stew.22

He freely admitted that Salomon had been in the wrong, and
persuaded the legislators that he was on their side. After meeting
with Bu ett, Senator Jake Garn turned to an aide and said, “You
know, we shouldn’t go ying o the handle.”
It hardly hurt that Bu ett was friendly with some of the key
players, such as chairman Markey. Nor did it hurt that, unlike
many businessmen, he had never lectured Congress on the evils of
regulation—Bu ett believed in government, and had long said so.
The usual tactic at a congressional hearing is to lob grenades at
the witness. But the congressmen were wary of slinging mud at
Bu ett. Despite his $700 million investment in Salomon, they saw
him as a gure from without Wall Street—from the Plains. “Half
the people think Omaha’s a farm town,” Bell noted.
Bell, who spent a lot of time with Bu ett in preparation, was
astounded by his inside knowledge of Washington. He thought him
far more complicated than his Rousseauian image:
He’s genial. He’s not outwardly crusty. But I had the impression that Bu ett was an

old New England Yankee—the eighteenth-century ethic that success in business was a
sign of God’s grace. There was no equivocation in morals. No room for sentimentality.
He does what he wants, very logical. He has no problem with the word “no.” There is
not a lot of pretense in the SOB. There are contradictions, but those are di erent. He’s
all of a piece—but it’s a very complex piece.

A hearing, like a trial, has a carnival spontaneity. Whatever
happens, there is no second chance. Even before the doors opened
on the sweltering afternoon of September 4, a crowd had formed
in the hallway of the Rayburn House O ce Building. Then
reporters, lobbyists, onlookers burst into Room 2123. They lled
the seats and stood in the aisles—the same hearing room where a
glowering Michael Milken had pleaded the Fifth. The front was
lled with the technical paraphernalia of journalism—television
cameras with their blinding spotlights, tape recorders,
photographic equipment. The audience picked out Bu ett, in a
dark suit, seated at the witness table, and Katharine Graham,
sitting in front. Now, in their preambles, the congressmen

ascended to spasms of telegenic outrage. An arrogant disdain … the
American people … ripped o by a few aggressive traders … Ivan
Boesky … Michael Milken … our nancial culture … these disgraceful
episodes …23
Rep. Jim Slattery addressed the witness. Mr. Bu ett, you have an
opportunity to provide a great service for the taxpayers of this country.
… And I am pleased that you have moved quickly to re [sic] the upper
managers that appear to be responsible.… And I only hope that we
won’t learn in the future about any sweetheart deals with these
managers that are being red now.… And as far as I am concerned,
those responsible deserve absolutely nothing from Salomon Brothers,
not a dime in severance pay, not a dime in remuneration of any kind,
and not a dime to pay for their defense, either … nothing but a swift
kick in the butt out of Salomon Brothers and onto the street.…
Having hanged the old regime, they rushed to praise the new.
Mr. Bu ett, I want to congratulate you.… Mr. Bu ett, you are a man
of unquestioned integrity.… Mr. Bu ett … who has followed the path of
the straight and true.…
Rep. Peter Hoagland, of Omaha, rose to introduce his neighbor.
A man who is typical of the people we grow and nurture in the
Midwest.
… He continues to live in a quiet, tree-lined street in Omaha.… He
les his own tax returns.…
Bu ett loped his way to the dais, trailed by a score of
photographers and cameramen. He shook hands with chairman
Markey, and there was a click-click-clicking like a swarm of
summer cicadas. His pro le was lled out now, slightly paunchy.
His eyebrows danced above his eyeglass frames, and his hair was a
mop of pepper and salt. He spoke in a tremulous voice, shadowed
by a nervous laugh.
Norma Jean Thurston (a.k.a. “Peroxide”), seeing Bu ett, on
camera, for the rst time since high school, instantly recognized his
mannerisms and wit. Harry Beja, his friend at Wharton, saw the
testimony live, in Mexico, where Beja had become a successful
businessman. Beja recognized Bu ett’s “brightness of spirit,” but
thinking of his friend’s shyness, Beja winced.

Bu ett sat in the witness chair, facing the members. As he began
to speak, his left arm swung in a decisive arc:
I would like to start by apologizing for the acts that have brought us here. The Nation
has a right to expect its rules and laws will be obeyed. At Salomon, certain of these
were broken.

The baldness of his apology would outlive all that followed.
Captains of Wall Street had been appearing in Congress since J. P.
Morgan, Sr.’s, de ant performance in the Pujo hearings of 1912.
Until now, none had ever said he was sorry.
A dozen shutters click-click-clicked. Bu ett made a pitch for
Salomon’s eight thousand employees, most of whom were
“hardworking, able, and honest.” He promised new measures to
ensure compliance with the law. But in the end, he recognized,
“the spirit of compliance is as important, or more so, as the
words.” Speaking of his vision for the new Salomon, Bu ett
reached for one of those vivid images that seemed to spring from
the lectern into America’s living rooms:
I want employees to ask themselves whether they are willing to have any

contemplated act appear on the front page of their local paper the next day, to be read
by their spouses, children and friends.… If they follow this test, they need not fear my

other message to them: Lose money for the rm and I will be understanding; lose a
shred of reputation for the rm, and I will be ruthless.

Bu ett’s emphasis on reputation was oddly reminiscent of
Morgan’s testimony that character—not money—was the basis of
credit. There the similarity ended. Morgan, whatever else,
epitomized Wall Street. Bu ett, who had made a fortune in the
stock market, was hailed as a Main Street antidote to Wall Street’s
excesses. It is doubtful that Salomon could have found another
living American who represented both these extremes.
The hearing, and also the follow-up in the Senate, was
remarkably gentle. The subcommittees saved their powder for the
regulators. So the Fed knew all along what was going on? Is that

correct, Mr. Corrigan?… As Bu ett left the House committee room
he was pursued by a mob of reporters. But he ducked into a
limousine, bound for the Washington Post.24
Salomon’s “ red managers” had not been kicked onto the street.
Gutfreund and Strauss had been xed up with an o ce and a
secretary on an otherwise empty oor of Salomon’s former
headquarters. The company had been paying their legal bills.
Bu ett had called Gutfreund a few times since taking over. An
associate of Gutfreund’s said, “I think he was being kind—telling
John he didn’t consider him to be scum.” But the day before the
House hearing, Gutfreund, in the interest of propriety, suggested
that the two stop speaking.
The day after the hearing, Salomon’s directors met in New York.
Bu ett raised the topic of bene ts for Gutfreund and the other
former managers. With Rep. Slattery’s bombast ringing in their
ears, the board cut o severances, bonuses, legal fees, o ce space,
secretaries, and health bene ts—the works. Gutfreund stoically
told friends that he understood that Bu ett was trying to save the
rm. When a colleague called to see how he was doing, Gutfreund
said, “You have to distance yourself from me—you and the rm.”25
Bu ett, meanwhile, was working in Gutfreund’s o ce and being
waited on by his former secretary. He had his friend’s olive-wood
Italian desk and his sweeping view of the Hudson and East rivers.
But he found it all unfamiliar and stressful.26
On Friday afternoons he could barely wait to board the
Indefensible, knowing that when he landed in Omaha, Astrid and
his family would be waiting for him at Gorats.27 Then, in the
comfort of his steakhouse, where the organist had been playing
forever and where the people knew nothing of nance, he would
unwind by telling stories of his week on Wall Street.
The most nerve-racking aspect of Salomon was that Bu ett had
to contend with so many outside forces. He had to reassure
bankers, credit agencies, investors, the press. He could not control
events at Salomon, as he did at Berkshire. “It’s like waiting for the
other shoe to drop—on a centipede,” he quipped to a friend.28 For
one of the few times, Bu ett was having trouble sleeping.29

His intimates worried about him, knowing that he had always
been so careful to stick to his knitting and avoid the unfamiliar.
Save for the time when Bu ett’s wife had undergone surgery,
Munger had never seen him so distressed. Rick Guerin, who had
saved Bu ett’s life during the boating mishap, said, “People don’t
understand the enormity of his gift to Salomon Brothers.” Another
chum, less charitably, said, “Warren is great at peace. We’ll see if
he’s good in wartime.”
Bu ett was a reluctant warrior, but he had certain qualities of
generalship, such as con dence, perspective, an unsurpassed
ability to focus on his object, and a gift for communicating all this
to the troops. Now he needed these qualities in spades.
The SEC wanted Salomon to turn over Wachtell Lipton’s report,
the most damning evidence in the case. Like any attorney-client
communication, the report was immune from subpoena power.
Salomon’s outside lawyers urged Bu ett to refuse. That is what
any lawyer in America would advise. According to Bell, the
lawyers said, “We’re going to have liability. We can’t admit to this.
It’ll be a nightmare.”
“I don’t want to hear that stu ,” Bu ett retorted. He didn’t care
about the civil liability—the money could be earned back. In his
mind, the legalistic details were far less important than that he
uphold his promise to the Feds.
“This is our position,” Bu ett went on. “We did wrong. We’re
going to show how we did wrong. We’ve signed the charge sheet.”
Then he turned to Bell. He wanted him to re Salomon’s paid
political consultants.
“Can we talk about that?”
“Yeah, sure.”
Bell explained that the consultants were Beltway insiders with a
keen grasp of politics. Salomon could use their expertise.
“You have a point,” Bu ett said. “But this is what we’re going to
do.”
The consultants were gone. Bu ett hated these professional
hand-holders. They would obscure the grand message which, like a
lone horseman, he was intent on delivering personally.

This, and, indeed, Bu ett’s every move was aimed at winning
forbearance. He ordered Salomon to stop trading with Marc Rich,
the fugitive oil trader. He ended political gift-giving, to avoid the
appearance that Salomon was buying favors. He sacked Wachtell
Lipton, which was linked to Gutfreund.
He repeatedly warned Salomon’s traders that they had to
operate “way, way away from the line”—another of Bu ett’s
simple but potent images. Within weeks, a half-dozen of Salomon’s
traders had gone to Bu ett to see if a planned stratagem met his
de nition of “the center of the court.”30
Eric Rosenfeld, the bespectacled trader and former Harvard
professor who had replaced Mozer, proposed a trading strategy to
pro t from discrepancies in tax laws. Rosenfeld had been working
on the idea for months, had gotten it blessed by lawyers, and felt it
would be highly lucrative.
Bu ett said, “Eric, I’m not comfortable with it.” He said it was
probably legal but “too close to the line.”31
By repeating such moralistic exhortations, Bu ett was subtly
trying to lift the employees’ self-image. Thomas Hanley, the rm’s
banking analyst, had never seen Salomon pull so much in unison.
He felt that Bu ett was “brilliant.”32
But Bu ett couldn’t get the story o the front page. Salomon
kept disclosing new details of Mozer’s wrongdoing, and the
government kept announcing new, or expanded, investigations
( ve federal agencies and various states got into the act). The
press kept speculating that other, unrelated sins at Salomon were
soon to be exposed; Salomon was hit by dozens of civil suits; its
bank lines were cut. The basic story didn’t change, but the surface
impression was of an ever-widening scandal.
Alarmingly, fear was spreading among Salomon’s customers,
who were loath to give business to a rm that might be indicted on
the morrow. British Telecommunications sacked it from a major
underwriting. Bond-trading customers defected.33 Trying to
reassure the CEO of a big corporate customer, Bu ett had to
literally put his hand across his heart and swear, “There are no
more bombshells coming.”34

After ve weeks, when the crisis seemed to be stabilizing, Robert
E. Allen, chairman of American Telephone & Telegraph, one of
America’s most respected CEOs, landed a blow from left eld,
publicly denouncing Salomon’s moral laxity as “unforgivable.”35
Salomon was like the proverbial dog with a can tied to its tail: it
raised a ruckus wherever it ran. The next day, September 24, the
stock hit a low, 20¾.
Two days later, Bu ett took o to meet with the Graham group,
which had mushroomed to fty-odd of his friends and spouses,
including the young Bill Gates, in Victoria, British Columbia. The
others were surprised that Bu ett took the time, but for him the
trip was a tonic. He stayed at the inn while they toured Victoria’s
lush, beautiful gardens—but Bu ett would have skipped the
gardens anyway. He did attend the seminar. The topic, assigned
just before the scandal broke, was “The Dumbest Thing I Have
Done in Investments or Business.”
In New York, the scandal was taking a toll on morale. A
manager complained, “It’s tough to come in in the morning and
open the paper. You just wonder when it is going to stop.”36
Rosenfeld, the able new chief of the government desk, went to a
restaurant frequented by young professionals on the Upper East
Side. He overheard people talking about Salomon—“Isn’t it
disgusting?” one said knowingly—as if the rm were shot through
with crooks.
Early in October, Bu ett held a pep talk with the sta . He
asserted unequivocally that he was feeling good about their
prospects, The employees, most of them, were living through a
crisis for the rst time. Bu ett had been there before.
I have seen a couple of companies taken into the emergency ward.… American
Express in 1963 and GEICO in 1976…. At GEICO a few people made mistakes. It went

from being an organization with enormous pride to an organization that was in doubt.

Policyholders were leaving by the tens of thousands. I have to tell you that the period
did last for some time. Jack Byrne had to wrestle with one alligator after another.37

GEICO’s stock, he noted dryly, had risen since then from 2 to about
194. As in buying a stock in a falling market, he told the
employees, they had to look beyond the passions of the moment to
a future for Salomon that he insisted would be bright.
On Wall Street, the betting now was that Salomon would
survive, but as a shrunken rm—as Business Week put it, “smaller,
less pro table, less powerful.”38 It was feared that Bu ett, while
cleansing Salomon, had emasculated it. He had overseen a sell-o
of $50 billion in assets, easing its credit worries, but reducing its
ability to make the big, blustery bets that had been its trademark.
Larry Tisch pointedly asked Bu ett, “Who’s going to be the risktaker in the Gutfreund sense of the word?” Bu ett did not have an
answer.39
Bu ett was not a physical presence at Salomon. He occasionally
wolfed down a ham sandwich in the executive dining room, where
the others dined on veal paillard, but there was none of
Gutfreund’s stalking the aisles. And, as the case dragged on, Bu ett
spent more of his time in Omaha.
He had close contact with only a handful of employees:
Rosenfeld, the whiz-kid trader, who was surprised by Bu ett’s
detailed knowledge of arbitrage, and the treasurer, the chief
nancial o cer, general counsel Denham, and Maughan, who
relied on Bu ett as a corporate encyclopedia.
The executives initially mistook Bu ett’s gracious exterior for
softness. But they discovered that Bu ett was tougher than his
image (a reversal of their experience with Gutfreund). “It’s a
perfect contrast with John,” said William Jennings, a senior vice
president. “Warren is not easy to convince. John had trouble
saying no.”
But Bu ett refused to manage Salomon. He admonished
Maughan, “I don’t want to disappoint you, but I didn’t grow up
wanting to run an investment bank.”40 In e ect, Bu ett re-created
the same role for himself—a concerned but distant overseer—that
he played at See’s Candy.
Unlike most CEOs, he did not identify with the other executives.
He was less a manager than an investor with a ringside seat. And

as an investor he was profoundly unhappy. In October, Bu ett told
Maughan, “You may be a wonderful company, but you’re a lousy
stock.” That was a tipo . Over the previous ve years, the return
on Salomon’s shares had ranked a miserable 445th among the S&P
500. But now, Bu ett’s focus was slowly shifting—from the scandal
to the stock.
III—Agony
Viewing Salomon as a long-term owner, Bu ett saw a picture that
was anything but pretty. Its assets had ballooned, yet its return on
capital had vastly diminished. It had consistently pro table areas,
such as the Tokyo branch, arbitrage and bond trading, and
underwriting. But its well-paid investment bankers had been losing
money for years. In equities, it was a pro t one year, a loss the
next.41 On balance, a huge engine had been assembled, capital
employed, labor expended, all for an enterprise that yielded a
pittance.
Bu ett was convinced that the problem was rooted in Salomon’s
extravagant bonuses. Gutfreund had let the executives take home
nearly three-quarters of the rm’s pro ts—as if he had never sold
the business and the executives had still been partners in it.42 The
real partners—the shareholders—had been left out. This failure to
hold managers accountable had sent a distorted signal, just as
Bu ett had once feared that too much allowance would distort the
message to his kids. With their bonuses rising, managers had
allowed entire divisions to run with “inadequate or nonexistent
returns.”43
To break this pattern, Bu ett decided to act boldly. On October
29 he took out a remarkable two-page ad in the New York Times,
the Wall Street Journal, the Washington Post, and the Financial Times,
reproducing Salomon’s third-quarter report. The heart of it was a
letter from Bu ett denouncing the company’s pay scale. He
emphasized that he had no problem with extraordinary pay for
extraordinary performance. But Salomon’s “share-the-wealth”

system was subsidizing all—even the mediocre—at the
shareholders’ expense.
Having said this, Bu ett dropped a bomb. He was lopping o
$110 million from the pool set aside for bonuses for 1991. As a
result, although pro ts that year (earned before the scandal) were
double those of 1990, bonuses would be slightly less than in 1990.
Those who didn’t like it could walk.
Our pay-for-performance philosophy will undoubtedly cause some managers to leave.
… In the end we must have people to match our principles, not the reverse.44

A quarter century earlier, standing in the shadows of the
Hathaway mill, Bu ett had told Ken Chace that he wanted
employees who thought like owners. Now, in the glass-and-steel
splendor of Wall Street, he told Maughan that he was quite
prepared to lose large numbers of sta . Maughan wondered how
many. Bu ett said, “Deryck, we can’t buy loyalty.”45
Bu ett’s manifesto generated a groundswell of support from
people outside Salomon, many of whom hoped that it might—
nally—bring some reasonableness to Wall Street’s pay scales.
Inside Salomon it was a di erent story. The employees felt they
were being made to take the fall for Mozer, and they deeply
resented Bu ett’s going public. The day the ad ran, Gary Goldstein,
a headhunter, got a torrent of calls from Salomon executives who
were, indeed, quite willing to have their loyalty priced.
What’s more, the size of the cuts—amid a record year on Wall
Street—stunned them. Maughan slashed bonuses for 70 percent of
Salomon’s managers.46 Investment bankers were shaved by an
average of 25 percent, with some taking cuts of as much as
$500,000. In addition, Bu ett and Maughan laid o eighty
professionals and two hundred support sta .47
Quite quickly, sentiment toward Bu ett soured. People were
grateful to him for saving Salomon. Now they’d had enough of
him. They thought he was pandering to the regulators and blamed
him for putting Gutfreund out in the cold. A veteran analyst said,
“Some of us who have been here a long time felt a certain a ection

—a strong one—for John Gutfreund. Warren was a savior. You
know how you feel about saviors. You love ’em but you also resent
them.”
Of Gutfreund’s barons, none had been more protected than
Stanley Shopkorn, Salomon’s head stock trader. Gutfreund used to
smoke cigars in Shopkorn’s o ce while the heavyset, be jeweled
horse player traded stocks. On Wall Street, Shopkorn’s reputation
for trading big positions and playing his hunches had given him a
certain aura.
However, the equities department, which he ran, was a poor
performer. Bu ett, totally unmoved by Shopkorn’s Runyonesque
charm, ordered him to sell a couple of losing stocks and to quit his
speculations. Shopkorn resigned.
His departure triggered a wave of defections in equities. After
the group’s paltry bonuses were announced, Bruce Hackett,
Shopkorn’s replacement, got on the squawk box and hollered to his
troops, “I’m mad as hell. I leave it to you to gure out why.”
Bu ett’s rush to remake the rm seemed to have opened a
trapdoor in Salomon’s attic, through which all of the demons
accumulated over the past decade were suddenly tumbling forth.
The fourth quarter of 1991 was a disaster. Salomon’s share of
stock underwritings collapsed from 8 percent before the scandal to
2 percent. The timing was awful. Wall Street was doing a record
business in underwritings and bonuses were up all over the Street.
But at Salomon, the salesmen and analysts had nothing to pitch,
and the bankers had no deals. So they left.
“Warren doesn’t realize how easy it is for people to leave—he
thought he was so goddam smart,” a departing banker fumed,
reclining in the leather-backed chair of a men’s club. “He’s running
it like a stock. He doesn’t care about the people.”
Warming to his subject, the banker continued, “Do you think his
entire record could go on the front page? He’d have to be almost
inhuman. A saint or something.”
In January 1992, Bu ett faced a crisis. Tom Hanley, the banking
analyst previously enthralled by Bu ett’s team spirit, threatened to
defect to First Boston unless his pay was doubled to $2 million.

Hanley had used similar ploys to extract raises in the past
(including a 40 percent hike in 1991). Though a prima donna,
Hanley was a valued analyst, and in uential in winning business
from banks. Bu ett let him go.
Four other analysts left the same week. It touched o a panic.
The cream was gone; now rivals were threatening to pick the
department clean. At Maughan’s urging, Bu ett backpedaled a bit
and guaranteed bonuses for six younger analysts. It was the rst
time he had blinked.
Meanwhile, Bu ett and Maughan were trying to design a system
that would link bonuses in each group to the group’s return on
capital. This was not so easy. Salomon had never bothered to
calculate how much capital each of its various units was using. To
Bu ett, it was a fatal oversight.
Rather strange, frankly, to me, to think of having a business that employs close to $4
billion of equity capital and not knowing exactly who is using what.48

In the midst of the battle over bonuses, Jack Byrne’s son Patrick,
a doctoral student in economics and philosophy at Stanford,
stopped o to see Bu ett, and the two had a long chat about
motivation. Bu ett encouraged young Byrne to question the dogma
of his textbooks. People—at least some people—he maintained,
were not the purely economic creatures depicted by economists.
They could also be motivated by loyalty.
To put it mildly, this was less than obvious on Wall Street.
People became investment bankers to make money. If you didn’t
pay them they would leave. Nick Brady, himself a former
investment banker, thought Bu ett was out of his element: “It’s
like running an opera. You’re dealing with people with big egos,
with prima donnas. I don’t think he understood the business
completely.”49
Many shared this view, some adding the twist that Bu ett was
putting on his Midwestern morals for public relations purposes.
Yet their criticism betrayed a level of discomfort that Wall Street
had always felt with Bu ett. Rub the critics deeply enough and

they, too, were uneasy about their profession’s pay and overall
behavior. The CEO of a major, nonpublic Wall Street competitor
sarcastically remarked that Bu ett “came in as Mr. Clean, the
open-eyed boy from Omaha.”
The guy was anything but. He’s a canny, shrewd operator. But his attempt to
rationalize pay was naïve. [Then a nervous giggle.] Some—a lot of it made sense. I

agree, the compensation isn’t rational. I’d hate for my pay to be on a public proxy.
[Another giggle.] He was quite right—you’ve got to run it like a business.

As Howie had predicted, people who had been waiting for the
chance to take a shot at his father came out of the woodwork.
Business Week, citing “lemons” such as Wells Fargo and Salomon
(and omitting Coca-Cola), asserted early in 1992 that Bu ett had
lost his touch as an investor.50 Three weeks later, Business Week
decided that Bu ett had also blown the job at Salomon. While
acknowledging that he had, in fact, saved it, the magazine
slammed him for “a series of mistakes.” He had embittered
employees, backtracked on pay, killed the rm’s taste for risk, and,
interestingly, was lacking in “leadership and trust.”51
Some of the criticism was intensely personal. A Wall Street
Journal pro le played up Bu ett’s mistress and implied that his
folksy image was something of a fraud.52 In this revisionist view,
Bu ett crafted his annual letters so as to de ect “tough questions”;
he levitated his stock by manipulating his image; he owed his
success to his nonpareil circle of contacts. The Journal, quoting
Michael Price, a competing money manager, saw Bu ett as “one of
the biggest invisible market operators going, big arbitrages and
all, getting better market information than anybody—and all
people see is this homespun, down-to-earth guy.”
Bu ett, who had been used to the press fawning over him, “was
really upset” by the article, according to Peter, who added, “I was
with him. He was obsessed with it.” Bu ett wrote a letter to the
Journal contesting numerous points in the article, but he was
typically unwilling to show his hurt publicly and insisted that the
letter not be published.

Next, Michael Lewis, the author of Liar’s Poker, smeared Bu ett
in The New Republic.53 In “Saint Warren: Wall Street’s Fallen
Angel,” Lewis charged Bu ett with a series of investing and ethical
aws so all-encompassing that an unknowing subscriber might
have supposed that he was reading of one of the century’s great
swindlers—and one of its great failures, to boot. Lewis took the
E cient Market Theory as gospel and dismissed Bu ett’s career as
a run of lucky coin ips. That aside, “Fallen Angel” was rife with
actual errors.*
Bu ett was livid over the Lewis piece. Morey Bernstein, the
author of The Search for Bridey Murphy and a Ben Graham devotee
who had known Bu ett casually, wrote Bu ett a sympathetic note,
damning Lewis’s article, apparently in profane terms. Bu ett—
ever careful with words—responded: “Morey—Thanks for the
empathy re the Michael Lewis piece. He is everything you say he
is.”54
The interesting question is, what was Lewis’s gripe with Bu ett?
There is a clue in Liar’s Poker, and it re ects on Wall Street’s
discomfort with Bu ett as well. In the book, Lewis, describing his
life as a young bond salesman, seems to celebrate his unloading of
$86 million of unwanted Olympia & York bonds on a gullible
client. Yet he admits to a hint of embarrassment over it. He has
stuck his “best customer,” and one who trusted him, with bonds
that Lewis “probably wouldn’t touch with a barge pole”—save for
the “glory” that will redound to him at Salomon.
I knew it was awful. But I feel much worse about it now than I did at the time.55

Now, the conclusion of his essay on Bu ett:
You can frighten people into behaving themselves for a while. But in the long run he’s

wrong.… Thus we arrive at what might be called Bu ett’s Dilemma: the choice
between doing good and making money.

In fact, it was Lewis who had made that choice. Bu ett, under
extremely trying circumstances, was attempting to do both.

Bu ett’s repeated exhortation—“Good pro ts simply are not
inconsistent with good behavior”56—was a challenge to Lewis’s
(and other cynics’) rationalizations.
By the time of Lewis’s piece, mid-February 1992, Salomon was in
limbo. The stock had recovered to 30. Customers such as the World
Bank and state pension funds had returned. The management had
been overhauled, and Bu ett was spending most of his time in
Omaha.
But Salomon’s corporate business continued to bleed. Morale was
su ering from speculation that Salomon was losing its core
viability, and by rumors that Bu ett was planning to return the
rm to its bond-trader “roots” and close up everything else, such as
its investment bank. One hundred employees defected in February
alone. Of those who had been on the payroll in August, a third of
the people in equities and a fourth of the bankers were gone.57
Even Denis Bovin, who had been Bu ett’s banker in his rst
dealing with Salomon, in the early seventies, and who had been a
fan of Bu ett’s personally, jumped to Bear Stearns.
As painful as such betrayals were, Bu ett relentlessly insisted
that Salomon was on track. When the dust settled, he maintained,
Salomon would be stronger, in all areas, than ever. No one on the
sta saw him waver, even in the slightest. This was Bu ett’s
essential virtue—the courage to stick to his course. Don Howard,
the chief nancial o cer, said, “He conveyed to me that every
problem was surmountable.”
Inwardly, it was killing him. Perhaps the most stressful aspect
was that Bu ett was not used to working with people who were
not personally loyal to him. “It’s agony,” Munger said that spring.
“It’s just bloody murder. Salomon is losing key employees even as
we speak.” For as long as the Treasury case remained open, there
was scant hope of stemming the tide.
IV—First Love
It had dawned on Bu ett that the government was punishing
Salomon by making it wait. He pleaded with the Treasury to bring

the case to a head, though he was careful as always not to pressure
anyone. “Take your shots,” he would say. “We just don’t want to
bleed to death while you’re making up your mind.”58
The Justice Department and the SEC were demanding that
Salomon plead to a felony and pay $400 million in nes. Gary
Naftalis, Salomon’s criminal lawyer, considered that to be
shockingly sti . Kidder Peabody, which Naftalis had defended in
the 1980s, had paid only $25 million, and had not been charged
with a crime, after Martin Siegel, its star deal-maker, had
confessed to pervasive insider trading. All the government had on
Salomon was phony bidding. (The more serious charge of
manipulating the market in the squeeze had been dropped for lack
of evidence.)
The boyish-looking Naftalis even kidded government lawyers
about the case’s seeming smallness, remarking, “What baby died
over this?”
An assistant U.S. attorney replied, “You lied to the government.
That’s worse than insider trading.”
The decision was up to Otto G. Obermaier, the U.S. attorney in
Manhattan. Unlike his predecessor, Rudolph Giuliani, who had
handcu ed investment bankers in daylight, Obermaier was a legal
scholar and thought to be dovish. But prosecutors live in a world of
deterrents. Obermaier wanted a guilty plea.
As Naftalis and the U.S. attorney’s o ce began to negotiate,
Naftalis realized that Bu ett had presented him with a subtle
weapon. In August, Bu ett had promised to cooperate. In the
government’s view, he had kept his word. If Obermaier were to
prosecute Salomon now, Naftalis argued, Bu ett’s openness would
be seen as naïve. In e ect, the prosecution would then deter not
future crimes but future cooperation. Bu ett had made his own
behavior—not Mozer’s or Gutfreund’s—the issue in the case.
In April, as the case was nearing a climax, Naftalis played his
ace. He, Denham, and attorney Ron Olson brought Bu ett to the
U.S. attorney’s o ce, a squat, brownish building by the federal
courthouse, for a meeting with Obermaier. As this was to be
Bu ett’s show, the lawyers held their tongues.

Bu ett began unassumingly, giving Obermaier a sense of his
career.59 He didn’t argue the case, and yet, like a country lawyer
who may defend a man accused of murder by pointing out the
upstanding nature of his client’s family, he was arguing it all the
same. He sketched in the milestones in his relationship with
Salomon—how it had once raised money for Berkshire, how it had
continued to be his broker ever since, how Gutfreund had bailed
out GEICO. In Bu ett’s experience, Salomon was a proud rm, of
which his own twenty-year tie to it was emblematic. Though not
belittling the moral and nancial depths to which Salomon had
fallen at the hour of Gutfreund’s desperate call to him, Bu ett
argued that, in both senses, the rm had recovered. “The rm is
totally di erent than it was in August,” Bu ett insisted.
Obermaier asked just one question: how long would Bu ett be
around?
Now, Bu ett talked about his philosophy of investing for the
long term—of treating his companies like partners—as he had
done in his early years and right through the rip-roaring eighties.
He hadn’t just sucked the blood out; he had stuck with them. And
now and in the future he would be on Salomon’s board, invested in
the company and watching over it. As on the Sunday when he had
pleaded with Brady—as in the entire Salomon episode—Bu ett
presented the case in personal terms.
Obermaier would insist that the facts were su cient to indict.60
Nonetheless, in May he announced that he would not bring
charges. Concurrently, the various federal agencies announced a
civil settlement with Salomon. To a man, the top o cials had been
personally won over. Powell, the assistant Treasury secretary, said,
“I think every Salomon shareholder should have a little picture of
Warren Bu ett by their night table.”61
The settlement cost Salomon $290 million (including $100
million set aside for private suits)—then the second-largest penalty
ever levied against a U.S. securities rm.
The nal SEC complaint detailed ten “extremely serious” bidding
violations. Breeden gravely noted that he had issued four hundred
subpoenas and taken thirty thousand pages of testimony to ferret

them out. Yet the SEC had done more to prove Salomon’s integrity
than its guilt. Its exhaustive probe had turned up no evidence of
a rmative wrongdoing other than that by Mozer—the full extent
of which Salomon had uncovered and disclosed itself.
In June, Bu ett stepped down from the chairman’s post he had
held for nine months. The stock was at 335⅝—25 percent higher
than in August 1991. Bu ett stunned the Street by picking Bob
Denham, his tightlipped lawyer, to succeed him.
The bland, soft-spoken Texan was a Wall Street outsider whose
loyalty was to Bu ett, and whose mission would be to preserve
Bu ett’s reforms. Deryck Maughan would continue to run the
business, but the power behind the throne was unchanged; it would
be Bu ett himself.
Having ridden into Salomon with fanfare, Bu ett slipped away
with none. Merely a note, scribbled by Bill McIntosh:
“I’m with Salomon” has always been said with pride, and thanks to you it will be for
many years to come.

Bu ett bought more stock in Salomon, raising Berkshire’s stake
in it to 20 percent. After rising to 50, the stock fell sharply after
Bu ett’s purchase, but it remained above its high for the period
that he had been chairman.
The Treasury market underwent modest reform. The Fed
retained Salomon as one of its primary dealers, but post-scandal
changes diluted the club’s importance. The wooden box at the Fed
went the way of the horse and buggy.
Paul Mozer admitted that he had lied to the Treasury. He served
four months in a low-security jail, paid $1.1 million in various
nes, and was permanently banned from the securities business.
The SEC brought an action against Gutfreund for failing to
supervise Mozer. He settled for a $100,000 ne and a stipulation
that he would not run another securities rm. In exile, he grew
bitter at what he considered his unjust railroading and at the loss
of his social standing. His friendship with Bu ett dissolved. In an
ugly aftermath, Gutfreund brought a claim against Salomon for

money and stock he said he was owed in severance, options, and
bonuses—an amount that swelled with Salomon’s rising share price
to $55 million. In an e ort to hash it out, Gutfreund met Bu ett
and Munger, in California, and lost his temper with them.62 An
arbitration panel ruled against Gutfreund—leaving him with zero.
Gutfreund was commonly depicted as a managerial giant with
an ethical aw. Ironically, that was doubly o the mark. He was
an upright but weak manager who built little of enduring value for
stockholders. His procrastination over Mozer was simply one more
management failure.
Salomon recouped some, though not all, of its market share in
underwritings and rebuilt its sta . Though the swagger was gone,
it made gains in investment banking and reestablished itself as a
player in worldwide markets.
In the two years following the scandal, Salomon had record
pro ts. Then, during the tumultuous bond market of 1994, it
su ered wrenching losses. It was increasingly apparent that some
of the damage from the scandal had lingered. The best of
Meriwether’s former traders, including the talented Eric Rosenfeld,
defected to join Meriwether in a new arbitrage venture. Salomon’s
own arbitrage group was decimated. And, after a couple of years
of sanity in the payroll, bonuses again exploded out of control,
forcing Bu ett to eat humble pie and again overhaul the
compensation system—triggering a new round of defections.
Salomon eventually returned to pro tability, but as an investment
for Bu ett it was distinctly mediocre. In sum, the jury remained out
on Bu ett’s decision to rebuild the entire rm and to entrust it to a
colorless administrator such as Maughan, rather than return
Salomon to its bond trader “roots,” which had always been its
strength. Moreover, Bu ett had yet to answer Tisch’s question:
who, if anyone, could replace Gutfreund as Salomon’s “risk-taker”?
When he stepped down, though proud of having rescued the
rm, Bu ett was rather eager to have the burden lifted. Peter
spoke to him after the settlement and thought he sounded like a
di erent person. Soon after, Warren and his wife ew into Bu alo
for a Bu alo News picnic, where Warren stood for a pie-throwing

contest. Then Stan Lipsey, the publisher, led Warren and Susie on a
tour. It had just rained, and Lipsey turned to make sure that his
guests were dodging the puddles and saw them walking arm in
arm. They went through an old graveyard, where Warren gazed at
the headstones, and to the foot of the Albright-Knox Art Gallery,
where a jazz band was playing. After a while, Lipsey and Susie
went to see the art, and a relaxed Warren stood on the steps,
listening to the jazz. Then they met Lipsey’s girlfriend and the
editor Murray Light and his wife for steaks—which Lipsey had
ordered from Omaha.
Bu ett was thrilled to get his life back. The Salomon escapade,
he wrote, was “interesting and worthwhile,” but “far from fun.”63
Now the sanctuary of Kiewit Plaza beckoned. To his shareholders,
Bu ett left no doubt: “Berkshire is my rst love and one that will
never fade.”64
* Lewis said, “In the middle of 1988 [Bu ett] broke with his strict rule of long-term

investing and became an arbitrageur.…” In fact, Bu ett had done arbitrage since 1954 and
had often written of it. Lewis said Bu ett had o ered to nance the RJR Nabisco deal; in fact,

he had refused to back it. Lewis, making light of Bu ett’s disclaimer, said: “He even once
suggested, in 1985, that his bogey was merely to outstrip the average returns of corporate
America.” Bu ett did not “suggest it once,” he had explicitly stated it in each annual report

for years. Lewis said Bu ett invested in bonds of RJR, “nearly … the largest bankruptcy in

history.” That was true—but Bu ett had invested after the bonds had fallen, and had made a
killing on them.

Chapter 23

BUFFETT’S TROLLEY

Forecasts may tell you a great deal about the forecaster; they tell you
nothing about the future.
WARREN BUFFETT, BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY INC ., 1980 ANNUAL REPORT

Bu ett’s moves of the early nineties may be quickly sketched. After
the Soviet Union collapsed, there was talk of a peace without end,
and defense stocks were cheap. Bu ett scooped up 14 percent of
General Dynamics at 11 a share.1 Rather soon, a civil war raged in
the former Yugoslavia, utopia was put on hold, and General
Dynamics went to 59⅛.*
Bu ett raised his stake in Wells Fargo. When the recession in
real estate ended, the bank recovered. Its earnings soared, and
Bu ett’s much-maligned investment, acquired at an average of 62
a share, took wing to 216.
Bu ett also bought big stakes in two familiar-type companiesGuinness, the distiller of Johnnie Walker and other consumer
brands; and, most recently, newspaper empire Gannett.
Finally, Bu ett bought three New England shoe manufacturers
for about $600 million—a little-known but huge addition to
Berkshire’s portfolio. H. H. Brown and Dexter Shoe, the two bigger

companies, had resisted the onslaught of imports by adhering to
Rose Blumkin work habits and by developing speci c product
niches, such as work shoes and outdoor shoes. Both were wellmanaged, family-style companies up Bu ett’s alley.
Mrs. B herself made a détente with her grandsons and admitted
publicly that she had made a mistake. Remarkably, she sold her
new store to Berkshire for $5 million and returned to the fold.2 At
ninety-nine, she continued to work at the new locale, in charge of
her own carpet business, seven days a week. “I am delighted that
Mrs. B has again linked up with us,” Bu ett reported happily. “Her
business story has no parallel.”3
Among Bu ett’s other holdings, Gillette soared to 52⅛ and CocaCola climbed to 74¼, a quadrupling and near-septupling, each in
six years’ time. † Gannett quickly surged 25 percent and Bu ett
cashed out Champion at a pro t.
American Express red Jimmy Robinson. True to form, Bu ett
ploughed another billion dollars into this old favorite. By the end
of 1995, his investment was up 47 percent.
USAir’s total losses following Bu ett’s investment mounted to $3
billion. In 1994, it suspended its preferred dividend to Berkshire.
After an upturn the following year, Bu ett decided to cut his losses
and bail out.
None of these stocks moved as dramatically as Berkshire itself. In
June 1992, when Bu ett stepped down from Salomon, Berkshire
was at $9,100. In November, it broke $10,000. Late in the year,
Bu ett redeemed Berkshire’s zero-coupon bonds—a signal that he
thought the stock was cheap. During 1993, it was as if traded by
the gods. By Valentine’s Day, Berkshire had risen to $12,400. It
soared, like a messenger to Olympus, through spring and summer,
whence it reached a peak of $17,800. Then it gave some ground
and closed at $16,325.
The young man who had once put pinball machines in
barbershops was proclaimed by Forbes to be the richest fellow in
the land.4 In 1994, Bu ett relinquished the crown to the young Bill
Gates. However, he did not exactly lose ground. Berkshire rose 25
percent (in a year in which the Standard & Poor’s 500 inched up 1

percent.) Then, during the euphoric bull market of 1995, Berkshire
rose a phenomenal 57 percent. The stock, which Bu ett had begun
buying at precisely $7.60 a share, nished at the astonishing gure
of $32,100. At that price, Bu ett was worth $15.2 billion,
surpassing Gates.
Over thirty-one years, his stock has appreciated at a rate of
27.68 percent a year, compounded. Over the same span, the Dow
Jones Industrial Average, including dividends, has a growth rate of
10.31 percent a year, and the Standard & Poor’s 500 of 10.7
percent.5 Put di erently, if in 1965 one had put $10,000 into
Berkshire and like amounts into the S&P 500 and crude oil, the
Berkshire at year-end 1995 would have been worth $17.8 million,
the S&P portfolio $224,000, and the crude oil $72,000.
If one tacks on the record of Bu ett Partnership, Bu ett has been
doing it for four decades, without much leverage, without
speculating or taking undue risks, and without su ering a single
down year.6 Although nay-sayers continue to greet his each new
investment with a chorus that “this time” Bu ett has nally blown
it, no one else has a record over a similar span that compares.
Arguably, no one is close.
Among history’s great capitalists, Bu ett stands out for his sheer
skill at evaluating businesses. What John D. Rockefeller, the oil
cartelist, Andrew Carnegie, the philanthropic steel baron, Sam
Walton, the humble retailer, and Bill Gates, the software nerd,
have in common is that each owes his fortune to a single product
or innovation. Bu ett made his money as a pure investor: picking
diverse businesses and stocks.
When he took over Berkshire, in 1965, the once-great yarn mill
was fading. He redeployed its capital into insurance, candy,
department stores (a mistake), banking, and media. These were
followed by tobacco, soft drinks, razor blades, airlines (another
mistake), and various whole businesses from encyclopedias to
shoes. In sum, he built an industrial empire now worth $38 billion
entirely from what miserable trickle of cash he could wrest from a
dying textile mill, before that mill was sold for scrap. Though still
run by a corporate sta of twelve, Berkshire, ranked by market

value, is now the nineteenth-largest company in the United States,
worth more than household names such as American Express,
Citicorp, Dow Chemical, Eastman Kodak, General Mills, Sears
Roebuck, Texaco, and Xerox.7
Investors counting on Bu ett to stay in orbit should keep in
mind his perennial complaint about the burden of size. So far, it
has not a ected him. Over the last decade, Berkshire’s rate of
appreciation has been a whisker better than Bu ett’s overall rate
of 29.2 percent. But the depressing truth is that allocating capital
will get tougher as Bu ett’s assets grow.
Also, the themes that have provided his biggest winners—
consumer franchises and newspapers and television—could be
getting long in the tooth. The societal trend toward discount,
private-label shopping poses a real challenge to brand names. In
1994, Bu ett discovered that Guinnesse’s well-known drinks were
not so impervious to competition as he had gured—and he
abruptly sold the stock, taking an estimated 15 to 20 percent loss.
In the not-too-distant future, it is not unthinkable that Coca-Cola
and Gillette, in which Bu ett has much bigger investments, will
face serious threats to their pro t margins.
Similarly, if the futurologists are even partly right, newspapers
and networks will have to contend with a proliferation of new
outlets, and even with new forms, of news and entertainment.
Though it is far too early to single out winners and losers, it is a
good bet that once-safe media companies will nd their “toll
bridges” under attack.
Perhaps that helped to explain Bu ett’s quick response to
Michael Eisner, chairman of Walt Disney, in summer 1995. Bu ett
and Eisner were guests at investment banker Herb Allen’s annual
retreat for entertainment moguls and family members in Sun
Valley, Idaho. Eisner was packed and ready to leave the pristine
resort, but on his way to the parking lot he bumped into Bu ett
and blurted out, “What do you think about selling ABC for cash?”
Bu ett had sworn never to abandon Tom Murphy, his friend and
the Cap Cities/ABC chairman. But Bu ett’s instincts told him that
Murphy, who had resisted such overtures in the past, might be

ready, particularly if Eisner could be persuaded to pay in stock.
And Bu ett himself thought the company was ripe. Though still
Cap Cities’ biggest shareholder, he had recently sold some of his
stock at $63 a share. ‡ By the time he saw Eisner in Sun Valley, the
stock, bene ting from a cyclical upturn in advertising, had vaulted
to $102.
“Sounds good to me,” Bu ett shot back. “Why don’t we talk to
Murph?” Coincidentally, Bu ett was on his way to play golf with
Murphy and also with Bill Gates, and suggested that Eisner come
along.
Murphy seemed unsure. But at the right price, the prospect of
combining ABC’s network with Disney’s famous brand name and
product line was irresistible. After the retreat, Eisner and Murphy,
counseled as usual by Bu ett, began to negotiate in earnest.
Murphy’s main concern was that his own shareholders get a chance
to participate going forward—what he called a “ticket on the horse
race.”
Incredibly, they cut a deal in only two weeks. Disney would
acquire Cap Cities/ABC for $19.5 billion—the second biggest deal
in history, trailing only RJR Nabisco. Cap Cities shareholders—
Berkshire included, of course—got $127 a share, seven times
Bu ett’s going-in price of 17¼. (As Murphy and Eisner had
compromised and made it a part-stock, part-cash acquisition,
Berkshire became a big investor in Disney, one of the best of
Bu ett’s early stocks in the 1960s.) Bu ett’s total pro t from
investing with Murphy, long his favorite CEO, was just over $2.5
billion.
And Bu ett had a big idea for what to do with his pro t—to
nally close the loop with GEICO, the investment that had
bewitched him literally from the start of his career, in Ben
Graham’s investment class. As a salesman starting out in his
father’s brokerage, he had bought the stock for himself and touted
it to customers. In 1951, the Commercial and Financial Chronicle had
published Bu ett’s write-up of GEICO next to a mug shot of the
buttoned-down, cherubic twenty-one-year-old under the apt title

“The Security I Like Best.”8 By the 1980s, Berkshire owned half of
GEICO.
Bu ett had occasionally given thought to buying the rest, which
traded publicly. But in the 1990s, GEICO had been a
disappointment. Its success had been based on direct marketing to
low-risk automobile drivers, but it had stumbled by going into new
areas such as nance, home insurance, and aviation insurance.
And William Snyder, the CEO who succeeded Jack Byrne, had
bought a couple of insurance companies that weren’t direct
marketers. Its pro t slumped, due partly to Hurricane Andrew;
worse, GEICO seemed to have lost its focus.
Bu ett, plainly unhappy, aired his concern with two in uential
GEICO directors, Samuel Butler and Lou Simpson.9 Bu ett even
said he was thinking of selling his stock—a comment certain to
alarm them. Butler and Simpson, who had been worried about
GEICO even before, now decided that Snyder should be eased out
as CEO a year ahead of his planned retirement. Bu ett backed
them and Snyder did step aside. Bu ett’s silent coup complete,
GEICO began to reform itself to Bu ett’s liking. It quickly moved
to dump its unsuccessful and distracting sidelines and to put more
capital into its core auto lines.
By 1994, Bu ett was su ciently pleased that he opened merger
talks with Butler and Simpson. A year later—just after the Disney
deal—Bu ett struck again, agreeing that Berkshire would acquire
the rest of GEICO for $2.3 billion. Super cially, it was a rich price,
but given Bu ett’s time horizon and GEICO’s renewed growth
prospects, it was not so rich as it seemed. And Bu ett now owned
all of the security he had “liked best” for forty-four years. Jack
Byrne said it was “predestined.”
Even before the GEICO deal, Bu ett had been sending signals of
his renewed enthusiasm for insurance—the game of odds that so
suits him. In particular, Berkshire’s in-house insurance operation,
which will be increasingly important to Berkshire’s future, has for
some time been writing special reinsurance policies, known as
“super-cats,” which is Bu ett-speak for super-catastrophics.

Insurance companies buy super-cats for protection against a
mega-disaster that would require them to pay claims on a great
number of policies. Berkshire got into the business in 1989, after
the twin calamities of Hurricane Hugo and the World Seriesshattering earthquake in San Francisco. With insurers devastated
and premiums soaring, Bu ett sensed the sort of bad news-cumopportunity that has always aroused his interest.
Since then, Berkshire’s super-cat business has grown to be
enormous. In most years, it is extremely pro table. But in an
unusually bad year, one with a series of big disasters or a single
blow such as a Hurricane Andrew, Berkshire could be stuck with
gigantic losses, possibly as much as $600 million.10 (Few insurers
write super-cats, because the stakes are so big.)
Bu ett and Ajit Jain, the Indian-born, Harvard-educated star of
Berkshire’s super-cat business, who works in Connecticut,
frequently chat about the odds of a major earthquake in New
Zealand, a ood in the Midwest, or a radical change in long-term
climatic patterns.11 But super-cats occur too infrequently for the
odds to be gured with precision, so Bu ett and Jain must rely on
judgment and on an informed reading of history.
Who would have guessed, Bu ett recently wrote, that the United
States’ most serious quake would occur in New Madrid, Missouri? It
did, in 1812—an estimated 8.7 on the Richter scale. “Now you
know why I su er eyestrain: from watching The Weather
Channel.”12
Thanks largely to super-cats, Berkshire’s insurance oat has
multiplied tenfold over a decade. In 1995, the oat was $3.6
billion, a gure which will nearly double with the addition of
GEICO. This money may be thought of as a low-interest loan,
which is Bu ett’s to play with until claims are made. In recent
years, Bu ett has had the use of this immense sum at an e ective
cost that is lower than the rate on long-term government bonds.
This gives Bu ett a huge advantage.
Though normally reluctant to talk up the future, Bu ett has been
predicting a rosy one for his insurance operation. He has said that
he and Munger expect it to be their “main source of earnings for

decades to come,” and has hinted that he thinks its value is
enormous.13 But as Bu ett freely admits, it will be hard to evaluate
his bet on super-cats until decades of loss experience can be toted
up.
Given this embarrassment of riches—from Disney to GEICO to
super-cats—it is small surprise that the public’s expectations for
Berkshire were becoming in ated. By early 1996, its share price
was swelling toward $40,000. Bu ett was worried that the shares
were becoming bait for speculators, and he was highly agitated by
the plans of a couple of promoters to take advantage of Berkshire’s
unusual share price by peddling low-priced “clones.” (The
promoters intended to create investment trusts that would
purchase shares of Berkshire and then sell low-priced units to the
public.) Obsessed, as usual, with controlling every aspect of
Berkshire, Bu ett decided to beat these promoters to the punch
with a baby Berkshire of his own.
In a sort of do-it-yourself stock split, Bu ett devised a new issue
of Berkshire—Class B common stock—worth 1/30 of the old shares
and expected to trade at 1/30 the price. Shareholders could hang on
to the ordinary common, now known as Class A, or (at any time)
convert—one A share for thirty B shares. (Bu ett would keep the
high-priced variety.) Of course, in value terms they were identical:
the same pizza cut in thirty slices.
But given that small investors attracted to his celebrity might be
especially tempted to hop aboard the “cheaper” B stock, Bu ett did
what virtually no chief executive has ever done—he warned that
the price of his stock (then $36,000) was more than he would pay
for it. Berkshire’s intrinsic value had continued to grow at an
impressive rate, but its stock, in recent years, had overperformed
it, Bu ett warned in his latest annual report. “Inevitably, there will
be periods of underperformance as well.” In short, investors who pay
too much for Berkshire—or any stock—implicitly are betting on its
high performance to continue, perhaps for many years into the
future.

Discussion of such an extended time period makes Bu ett’s
shareholders uncomfortable. It reminds them of the one “super-cat”
they fear the most. As one shareholder and longtime friend
admitted bluntly, “All of us have a vested interest in Warren’s good
health.”14
Among the stockholders, the size of the “Bu ett premium”—that
is, the amount above fair value that Bu ett’s presence adds to the
stock—is a subject of endless debate. It is feared that his death
could be followed by panic selling, though, as Bu ett would be
quick to point out, his death would not a ect the value of
Berkshire’s Coca-Cola stock or of any of its other assets. Save for
rare occasions, such as his recent annual letter, Bu ett does not
comment on what he thinks Berkshire is worth. His policy is to
disclose what he will about the company and let trading follow its
course.
But the obsession with Bu ett’s longevity is one that Bu ett,
though for di erent reasons, feels more keenly than anyone. He
repeats at every turn the quip that he plans to run Berkshire for at
least a few years after his death, via séances. (No saying goodbye
to Berkshire, even then.)
When Doris, his elder sister, researched the Bu ett family tree,
Warren said the only thing he wanted to know about his ancestors
was how long they had lived.15 Another time, he remarked to a
friend that although scientists had not found a correlation between
age and wealth, he didn’t think they had ever studied age and
superwealth.16 Still again, when a shareholder asked what his goal
was, now that he had become the richest man in the country,
Bu ett spit out, “To become the oldest one.”17 Even in his private
life, he married a woman with a singular interest in helping people
cope with death.
It is scarcely implausible that Bu ett’s fear of death has
contributed to his drive to accumulate. Agnostic and hyperrational,
he has few other opiates. His one passion has been to collect—not
money, precisely, but tangible evidence of himself. He clings to his
friends, his house, his old foods and stock lines, and his stocks
themselves. Notably, he says he does not enjoy running businesses;

he enjoys owning them.18 In the view of his friend Barbara Morrow,
the formative trauma of his life was when he was yanked out of
Omaha to go to school in Washington—a forced separation. He has
been accumulating assets, but hardly ever selling or disengaging
from them, ever since. As he commented in a recent letter, “We
like to buy. Selling, however, is a di erent story.”19 In a sense, his
whole career has been an act of holding on—of refusing to say
goodbye.
One sees him in Omaha, on a spring Sunday morning, the day
before Berkshire’s annual meeting. An ersatz trolley car, not too
di erent from the one Bu ett rode as a boy, is making the rounds
of Omaha’s hotels, picking up his guests. Bu ett is at the front of
the trolley. He heartily greets his visitors—the widow of a longtime
friend from Wharton, a fellow student of Ben Graham’s, the CEO of
a company Bu ett owns—who step from various stages of his life
as from the pages in an album. Bu ett, who is dressed casually and
is in a jovial mood, guides the trolley to his country club, where he
is throwing a brunch for more than one hundred of his closest
disciple-friend-admirers.
In the afternoon, the festivities, now open to all shareholders,
continue at Borsheim’s. Tables of caviar, raspberry-and-kiwi tarts,
cheesecake, and horseradished roast beef are set beside the jewelry
and ne china. A string quartet entertains, and tuxedo-clad porters
ease among the crowd ferrying velvet-cased diamonds and trays of
champagne.
Bu ett has been in a back room, playing bridge with some pals.
As the party picks up steam, he quietly saunters in and stakes out a
position against a rack of diamond earrings. Shareholders screw up
their courage and wander over in groups of twos and threes.
Bu ett gets a charge out of it, not from the aspect of spectacle,
exactly, but from the feeling that all of these people are included in
his personal show.
Most of the faces at Borsheim’s are familiar to Bu ett. He
mentions that he knows a relative of 90 percent of Berkshire’s
7,500 shareholders on sight. He greets James Earl, a balding
astronomy professor, and proudly recalls that Earl’s parents

invested with Bu ett in the partnership back in 1957. Indeed,
Bu ett tracks the destiny of every one of Berkshire’s million-plus
shares—a level of familiarity that no other public CEO would
dream of or, for that matter, even remotely desire. But Bu ett
knows them all. Each time a share of Berkshire trades, Bu ett
makes a mental note of it, as though someone were getting on and
o his trolley.
This helps to explain Bu ett’s hold on his admirers. As uncanny
as his success has been, his sense of delity is even rarer. His
faithfulness to old friends and old habits illuminates his entire
career. Consider, for a moment, the advice of John Train in his
best-selling The Money Masters:
Everything has its season, which does not last forever. The world changes its spots,
and the investor must change his.20

Few people on Wall Street would disagree, or even give it a second
thought. The former disciples of debt, the Kravises and the
Perelmans and the rest, have already lost their taste for leverage
and in the nineties are selling equity.
Yet Bu ett has spent a lifetime wearing essentially the same
spots. He has never opted for investment fashions, be it the Go-Go
stocks of the sixties, the high leverage of the eighties, or the
derivatives of the nineties. He has continued to hunt for the
irreducible kernel that his teacher labeled “intrinsic value.”
Much has been made of Bu ett’s metamorphosis away from Ben
Graham, from “value” stocks to “growth” companies. The Street is
fond of such pigeonholes, just as the critic of art is quick to
recognize a Blue Period or a cubist phase. But such boundaries are
irrelevant to the artist. To Bu ett, the growth/value distinction has
always been illusory. He sees the growth potential of a business as
a component of its value, just as its assets are a component.21 At a
price, Coca-Cola’s potential represents good value; at some higher
price, it does not.
The point is that Bu ett views all investing, and all that he has
ever attempted, as “value investing.” Anything else, he wrote a

year after the Salomon episode, is unworthy of the name:
What is “investing” if it is not the act of seeking value at least su cient to justify the

amount paid? Consciously paying more for a stock than its calculated value—in the
hope that it can soon be sold for a still-higher price—should be labeled speculation.…
22

The world has largely lost sight of that distinction. The treasurer
of Orange County, California, thought nothing of borrowing
heavily and then speculating with the funds for public schools,
roads, and waterworks on esoteric interest-rate derivatives, as a
consequence of which the county recently went into bankruptcy.
Indeed, the notion of intrinsic value is itself something of a lost
ideal. In a world of shifting benchmarks and changing “spots,”
value is not intrinsic but ephemeral; the painting cannot be
appreciated until the critic weighs in, and beauty is truly up to the
beholder. In Orange County, beauty was whatever the treasurer or
Merrill Lynch, his broker, said it was. Neither really knew, and
therefore both were willing to speculate. At the other end of the
spectrum, this lack of conviction results more commonly in
cowardice and mediocrity.
If we have lost the people with Emersonian inner conviction, it
is because we have lost the xed stars that formerly guided them.
The modern relativism has reduced us all to being timid specialists,
peeping out from cubbyholes marked “growth” and “derivative.”
For similar reasons—the lack of intrinsic value systems—educators
wa e and juries seem unable to convict. They retreat, as it were,
into ambiguity, complexity, and cacophony. Where one conviction
is lacking, a thousand opinions will do—indeed, they become a
necessary recourse. Our captains seem the smaller for it, not only
on Wall Street but in industry, education, government, and public
life in general.
Bu ett, in contrast, seems the larger for his rare independence.
As he expressed it, “I don’t have to work with people I don’t
like.”23 There are few people, CEOs and statesmen included, who
would say the same.

We see him in his inner sanctum, without advisers or lackeys,
opposite the framed and fading newspapers and the looming
picture of his father, who counseled him toward just such sweet
Emersonian solitude. Hours pass without interruption; the
telephone scarcely rings. He is looking not for patterns on a screen
but for the fundamental values, the time-honored merchants, the
shoe companies, the Horatio Alger-Rose Blumkins, the Ben Rosner
retailers, the World Books, the salt-of-New Bedford Ken Chaces, the
scrupulous Tom Murphys, the universal Coca-Colas. He judges
them not according to the “season,” but by the sound principles
and aphorisms that his father or grandfather or Ben Graham might
have recognized. Bu ett has not always lived up to his heroes. He
is only human, and he certainly has strayed. But he has at least
been able to evoke their memory.
When Bu ett is called to his reward, it is likely that his bequest
will dwarf the legacies of Carnegie, Ford, Rockefeller, and all that
have gone before him.24 The Bu ett Foundation will probably nd
itself with the largest endowment in the country (the Ford
Foundation, the biggest, has assets of $7 billion). But the legacy
that preoccupies Bu ett is not what will happen to his money, but
what will happen to Berkshire itself. He harbors a ghoulish fantasy
that once he is in the grave, Berkshire will continue to operate as
in the past. Indeed, he has taken pains to assure investors that
whether he or his wife dies rst, “in neither case will taxes and
bequests require the sale of consequential amounts of stock.”25
If Bu ett and Munger are leveled by the same truck, or if Bu ett
does not get around to grooming a successor, the company, at least
temporarily, will be run by a “third man,” chosen by Bu ett. The
identity of this Harry Lime has long been secret, even to Bu ett’s
children.§ But after the GEICO deal, Bu ett revealed that GEICO’s
Lou Simpson would be called on to pinch hit for Berkshire “if
something were to happen to Charlie and me.”26
Beyond that, Berkshire will be in the hands of its board, which
Bu ett has handpicked. He has recently appointed his wife and son
Howie as directors, steps that he hopes will perpetuate the
company’s sense of mission. (The other directors are Bu ett;

Malcolm G. Chace III, the son of the former chairman; Munger;
and Omaha businessman Walter Scott, Jr.) His family members
will represent the controlling owner, presumably the foundation.
“All in all,” Bu ett wrote recently, “we’re prepared for ‘the
truck.’ ”27
At sixty- ve, Bu ett is in excellent health, though he seems to
have slept through the dietary revolution of the professional
classes. It is not uncommon for him to greet the morning with a
bowl of peanuts and a Cherry Coke. During a Super Bowl weekend
organized by Tom Murphy, Bu ett ordered vanilla ice cream and
chocolate sauce for breakfast. When his friends started kidding him
about his health, he responded stagily: “What I want people to say
when they pass my casket is—‘Bov, was he old!’ ”28
Though still absorbed in his work, Bu ett has become a tad less
intense with his success. His sons say he is more relaxed than in
years back; Peter is no longer aware of the clock ticking in his
father’s head.
Some of this may be attributable to Astrid, with whom Bu ett
has grown highly comfortable. Bu ett thinks that he has helped her
self-esteem,29 and no doubt draws pleasure from a sense of
reciprocity. When Bu ett and Astrid go out, say, to Gorats, Bu et
looks like any Omaha gentleman and his wife, sometimes draping
an a ectionate arm around her.30 Astrid has a sense of humor
about her role and has told one of Bu ett’s relatives that living
with Warren is “the best job” she has had. Joe Rosen eld, Bu ett’s
octogenarian friend, says, “Astrid is what he needs now. He can go
o and leave her and she doesn’t mind. She’s a free spirit—a girl of
quality.”
For all that, Warren is deeply attached to Susie, with whom he
reunites in one corner or another (such as in Paris for a board
meeting of Coca-Cola) every month or so. Warren also has a sense
of humor about the arrangement; he told a friend that he couldn’t
divorce Susie because she is too rich.31
Recently, Bu ett has somewhat loosened his purse strings. He
spent $1.25 million of his own money for a 25 percent interest in
Omaha’s minor league baseball team—e ectively an act of charity

to keep the team in town.32 In 1993, on the occasion of Mrs. B’s
hundredth birthday, Bu ett eschewed his usual gift of owers and
See’s candy and presented a check for $1 million to the Rose
Blumkin Performing Arts Center, an abandoned vaudeville house
Mrs. B was converting into a children’s theater. He also spends a
bit more personally, such as on his travel and on his pricey suits,
though the latter seem to develop rumples even in his closet. But in
relative terms, his spending (as well as his philanthropy) remains a
yspeck.‖
His life is his work; food and shelter are minor matters. Bu ett
still drives his own car, a blue Lincoln Town Car. He has no fancy
automobiles or homes, and he would not be interested in them if he
had. On a recent two-week stay at his ocean-view home in Laguna
Beach, he went out of the house but three times—twice to a movie
and once to have lunch (his daughter counted). He still plays
bridge, but usually via a computer (which he refuses to use for
work) many miles away from his partners.33
In Omaha, Bu ett has become a curiosity. People drive by
Farnam Street very slowly, sometimes slowing to a stop, gaping
with wonderment at the incongruously modest house by the
blinking light. Bu ett can see them from his kitchen, where he
might be scooping out some ice cream, or grabbing a Cherry Coke
to take to his “pit,” to settle in with papers and annual reports. He
and Astrid are alone in the house. Bu ett has no unkies or
hangers-on, and the two of them have no butlers or household sta
—only a maid who comes every other week.34 Astrid still prowls
the stores for bargains, and loads up her station wagon with
Cherry Coke when she nds it on sale.
Bu ett does enjoy being a billionaire, but in o beat ways. As he
put it, though money cannot change your health or how many
people love you, it lets you be in “more interesting
environments.”35 Bu ett mixes with a rari ed crowd of CEOs,
politicians, and others. Gary Kasparov, the world chess champion,
who has an interest in developing capitalism in Russia, has called
on Bu ett in Omaha. The end of summer 1994 found Bu ett on
Martha’s Vineyard, gol ng with Bill Clinton, after which he and

the President had a quiet dinner at Kay Graham’s. Most notably,
Bu ett has developed an intriguing friendship with Bill Gates, his
junior by twenty-six years and his nancial rival. Though Gates is
a technology freak and Bu ett is anything but, they plainly have
fun together. Both are ercely competitive, genuinely curious,
unusually boyish as CEOs go, and insanely rich. Having broken the
ice at a Nebraska football game, in 1995 the two traveled together,
and with their wives, to China.
And Bu ett nds a receptive audience when he wants to distill
the Zen of Warren Bu ett. He goes around quite often now, at
college campuses, at his companies, even in smaller, informal
groups, launching into his liturgy, retelling his stories, serenading
as many onto his trolley as he can.
Much about this life is strange, and much about Bu ett remains
obscure. Perhaps, as a judge in Bu alo once remarked of his
purported monopolist aims, the private man may be secreted “in
the unfathomable human mind.”
But the public legacy is secure. Bu ett’s uncommon urge to
chronicle made him a unique character in American life, not only a
great capitalist but the Great Explainer of American capitalism. He
taught a generation how to think about business, and he showed
that securities were not just tokens like the Monopoly atiron, and
that investing need not be a game of chance. It was also a logical,
commonsensical enterprise, like the tangible businesses beneath.
He stripped Wall Street of its mystery and rejoined it to Main
Street—a mythical or disappearing place, perhaps, but one that is
comprehensible to the ordinary American.
As opposed to the dark side of Wall Street, to which the public
was so accustomed, Bu ett’s was a face not often seen. He was one
of the few capitalists who got fabulously rich without leaving a
trail of those he had victimized. (His adversaries in Bu alo were a
singular exception). In Munger’s phrase, he strove to be more than
a “miserable accumulator,” in particular by treating investors and
investees as partners, with no ngers crossed and no “exit
strategies.”

And it is here that Bu ett begins to transcend nance and to
claim a space on a broader canvas. His comment that his favorite
holding period was “forever” was a stunning breach of the usual
horizon both on Wall Street and o it. “Forever” has an
embarrassing ring to postmodern ears; the word seems to belong to
dime novels and fairy tales.
Bu ett made that pledge to his candy business, his newspaper, to
Tom Murphy and Kay Graham and many more. In an age of
fraying loyalties, he turned investments into relationships, almost
into a form of social contract. As he wrote to his partners in 1969,
with regard to Berkshire Hathaway:
I certainly have no desire to sell a good controlled business run by people I like and
admire, merely to obtain a fancy price.36

Such a sentiment was unheard-of on Wall Street and blasphemous
in academia, but rare on Main Street as well.
It is more stunning today because it is more rare; it deviates not
only from the ckleness of mutual funds, but from all in society
that is transient. Today, the frenetic trading at Wall and Broad
may be seen as a metaphor for the rapidity with which once- rm
social connections, to job, neighborhood, family, civic a liation,
and the past itself, become unglued. And unglued each day all the
faster. When Andy Warhol predicted fteen minutes of fame for
each of us, he did not get the half of it. In these restless times, it is
not only our fame that disappears in a quarter of an hour, but,
seemingly, every relationship that once was enduring or valued for
its ongoing character. Professional partnerships splinter apart,
athletic heroes desert their teams, employers overhire and then
over re, and even our universities, the supposed repositories of
our past, race to reinvent the canons that had served for a nearmillennium. In our daily walks of life, the faces on the trolley
change overnight. Investors seek their exit strategies, but they are
hardly alone. Viewed in this light, Wall Street’s mania for shu ing
paper is only the most blatant sign of the general rush to put a
price on once-lasting commitments. This is why Bu ett lled a

hollow. More than most, he reclaimed the rewards that spring not
from trading commitments one for the next, but from preserving
them.
* Share prices in this chapter are as of December 31, 1995.
† In 1996, Coca-Cola’s stock split two-for-one.
‡ Prices of Cap Cities/ABC shares are adjusted for a ten-for-one split in 1994.
§ Harry Lime was the mystery
Third Man.

gure played by Orson Welles in the 1949 lm classic The

‖ In 1994, Bu ett’s two foundations gave away just a shade more than the $7 million they

received from the Berkshire gift program and from interest and dividend income combined.
In 1995, Bu ett raised Berkshire’s per-share gift from $11 to $12.

AFTERWORD
January 2008

Some months after Bu ett was published, in the spring of 1996, I
made the pilgrimage to Omaha for the Berkshire Hathaway, Inc.,
annual meeting. Before the formalities got under way, Bu ett was
seated at a small table greeting shareholders, many of whom bore
books, annual reports, and memorabilia for him to sign. Having
spent three-plus years writing his biography, without as yet having
gotten any feedback, I thought the moment had arrived. I fetched
one of my own copies of Bu ett and joined the queue. As I did so, I
remembered what Bu ett had told me years before when I was
doing my research—that he would not attempt to block me, but
neither would he give me any help. And so as I handed him the
book, as well as a ballpoint, I said emphatically, “Now I will ask
for something.” He grimaced as if he were cornered. Then he ung
the book open to the title page, etched the words “Warren Bu ett”
in his trademark scrawl, and shut the volume tight, as though
sealing it against any protest I might utter, any plea for an
intimacy or for a response that might, at the very least, reveal
something of his reaction.
When readers ask if there is anything I would change about the
portrait of Bu ett in this book, I often think of that bare-bones

autograph. Bill Ruane, his since-departed friend, remarked around
that time, “I’m not sure if you captured just how tough Warren is.”
Perhaps Bill was right. Bu ett did not build a company worth $220
billion (sixth largest in the United States) by being an easy mark;
in particular, he did not dodge every investment land mine of the
past half century without possessing a hard outer shell—a unique
ability to say no to all manner of investment promoters, bubble
pro teers, and well-meaning but deluded brokers. And even to
inquiring biographers. He answered to no one but himself.
The other question that arises, with increasing frequency, is
“Will there be a sequel?” That one is easier. Very little in the
portrait, and nothing in the investment pro le, has changed. That
may sound strange, given the relentless expansion of Berkshire’s
assets, not to mention the astounding continued rise in its stock. At
year-end 1994, Berkshire Hathaway was trading at $20,400 a
share; thirteen years later, the stock has hit the eye-popping gure
of $141,600. (To update the set of gures in the introduction, an
original partnership investor who had given $10,000 to Bu ett in
1956, which in the dollars of that day would have paid the salary
of a baseball star such as Ted Williams for two weeks, today would
be worth $550 million, or enough to sign an Alex Rodriguez for
twenty seasons.)
As lofty as it is, the current share price is actually evidence of a
marked deceleration. In the rst three decades after Bu ett
dislodged Seabury Stanton and began to transform Berkshire from
a sleepy New England textile manufacturer into a media,
insurance, and industrial conglomerate, the stock rose at a rate of
27 percent a year (which means that it doubled every third year).
Alas, since the initial publication of Bu ett, the stock has advanced
at merely 16 percent per annum. The “slowdown” is not news; it is
exactly what Bu ett predicted. The laws of mathematics assured
that as Berkshire grew larger, each new investment would have a
smaller impact on the whole. The growth rate would have to
diminish. What is news, or at least cannot fail to impress, is the
extent to which, even at the slower gait of his septuagenarian
years, Bu ett has left the market in the dust. Which is to say, post

1994 the broad market average is up two times, Berkshire six
times.
The more recent performance is a testimony to Bu ett’s
consistency, which may be his least appreciated trait. His rst rule
(“Never lose money”) was expressed so glibly that it may have
been taken for a lighthearted quip; with the perspective of more
time, it emerges as one of the keys to his success. The last dozen
years, in particular, have seen more than their share of investment
folly. We need only recall the ill-fated rush to lend to the teetering,
newly capitalist Russia of the 1990s, or the collapse of the meteoric
hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM), or the
madness of the dot-com bubble. During the last of those episodes,
shares of companies with no prospect of realizing earnings soared
while Berkshire’s stock, confounding all logic and despite steadily
rising earnings, was cut in half. The public became obsessed with
twenty-something website promoters, and it was commonly said
that Bu ett was outmoded, an old-economy relic, and so forth. To
Bu ett, it was a replay of the Go-Go era of the 1960s; the
speculative mania, rather than tempting him into taking more risk,
redoubled his innate sense of caution. Seeing the apparent pro ts
of their neighbors, investors who knew better jumped into the
game, but not Bu ett. “Never lose money” is an unyielding
standard; it forecloses the option of taking any speculative risks.
This is why Bu ett has so outdistanced investors who earn
impressive returns in many years but who, on occasion, succumb to
speculation and su er punishing losses. The e ect of even an
occasional severe loss on cumulative returns is devastating.
In 2007, Berkshire stock vaulted 29 percent (making Bu ett once
again the U.S.’s and now, most likely, the world’s richest man).
The outsize gain seemed a belated recognition of Bu ett’s prudent
approach. As investors panicked and ed to safety, T-bills fetched
a premium and so—almost as if it were a branch of the Treasury
Department—did Berkshire Hathaway. The context is worth
revisiting, if only because the script is so familiar. America was in
the throes of yet another nancial crisis, this one triggered by
waves of mortgage defaults and foreclosures, which themselves

were the fruit of a sharp escalation in housing prices that had
given rise to unsound lending practices. Even nancial institutions
not generally associated with mortgage lending were deeply
implicated, because they had invested in mortgage-backed
securities.
When the real estate market nally cooled, the losses were
horrendous. Virtually every major
nancial institution—from
Citigroup to Merrill Lynch to Bear Stearns to General Electric—was
burned. Berkshire had owned a big piece of Freddie Mac, the
mortgage giant, but Bu ett had sold it years before, out of concern
that it was trying to grow too fast. In the debacle of 2007,
Berkshire was not only unscathed, it emerged with $45 billion in
liquid assets, as well as an unblemished, triple-A credit rating.
Devastated bond insurers reached out to Bu ett for relief, and
there were frequent rumors that Berkshire would come to the
rescue of this or that beleaguered lender. Bu ett, of course, had
recapitalized Salomon Brothers when it was on the skids, and in
1998 he came very close to inking a deal to rescue (on
advantageous terms) the hedge fund LTCM. By the time of the
mortgage crisis, he, or his company, had become a unique
American institution—akin to that of J. P. Morgan, Sr., a century
earlier. It was, or was uniquely capable of being, a lifeboat to Wall
Street’s fallen, the rm whose credit was invariably soundest when
the system was under its greatest stress. As if to seal this legacy, at
year-end ’07 Berkshire made a $4.5 billion acquisition of
diversi ed assets—its biggest outside of the insurance industry
ever. At the age of seventy-seven, Bu ett was reaping the bene ts
of the watchword of his distant forebear Zebulon: “Save your
credit, for that is better than money.”
His corporate empire (which begins, as always, with insurance,
and includes dozens of businesses ranging from private aviation to
carpeting to water treatment products to household paints) is
larger today and more diverse than a decade ago. Berkshire also
has invested overseas, in countries as disparate as Israel and
China. And the relative concentration of industries has shifted—
away from the newspapers he loved as a boy and other media

assets, which have been hit hard by the Internet. In recent years,
with his usual astute sense of timing, Bu ett has acquired huge
interests in energy. But Bu ett has always followed opportunity,
and as he still adheres to the price and value discipline that he
learned at Ben Graham’s knee, nothing about his approach has
changed.
Bu ett is also more celebrated today as a public gure. In the
early 1990s, people often asked me to repeat the name of my
subject, as though trying to commit a strange new word to
memory. No such obscurity shrouds Bu ett today. His avuncular
face—more rounded with age—stares out from magazine covers
and television specials; his comments are headlined on CNBC; he is
friendly with baseball stars (indeed, with A-Rod) and with
Democratic politicians from Hillary Clinton to Barack Obama. But
the change has been evolutionary, not sudden, and the urge to
command a public audience was always there, even in his
twenties, when his friends would gather at his feet and listen to his
nancial sermons in awestruck silence.
Bu ett has made one truly signi cant change—a reworking of his
estate. Ironically, though this is a personal matter, it is likely to
in uence his public legacy more than any investment he has made.
Half a century ago, as a Pepsi-Cola-imbibing young man, Bu ett
agonized (as he admitted to Jerry Orans) over what to do with his
fortune—a fortune he had not yet obtained but that he was sure
would one day be his. The problem nagged at him for fty years,
looming larger as his assets grew. Always he had the cushion of
believing that his wife, Susie, would outlive him, and that if need
be she would dispose of their assets. However, in 2004 Susie died
of a stroke. Bu ett married his longtime companion, Astrid Menks,
but the inheritance issue could no longer be postponed. In 2006,
Bu ett stunningly reversed his intention to hang on to his assets
until death—and announced a plan to slowly give away (with
annual bequests) 85 percent of his Berkshire stock. Five-sixths of
the money will go to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, which

is primarily dedicated to ghting disease in the developing world.
The rest will go to four family foundations (one that was his and
Susie’s and three others, each of which is run by one of the Bu ett
children).
The plan to transfer stock to Gates was a lightning bolt that only
Bu ett could have conceived of. Combining his money with that of
his close friend—in recent years the only American richer than he
—will create by far the world’s largest foundation. The size of
Bu ett’s annual gifts will depend, of course, on the future level of
Berkshire stock, but at current prices, Bu ett has a fortune of $64
billion—probably the greatest on earth. And yet, what is truly
notable about the plan is its modesty. It is not just that the bulk of
Bu ett’s money will be administered by someone else, and that no
hospitals will bear the Bu ett name, nor will researchers,
scientists, and doctors around the globe associate their funding
with the Oracle of Omaha. It is his trademark insistence on staying
within his “circle of competence”—on doing only what he is good
at. By temperament, he was a poor philanthropist. He was too
fearful of not getting good value to feel easy about writing checks
(or perhaps, to use a Bu ettism, he was simply too cheap). In any
case, his refusal to give, or to give in proportion to his means, has
long been a sore spot to his friends. And so, turning his logical
mind to his own estate, he coolly decided to give his money to
someone better equipped to dispense of it than he—a trusted friend
who in all likelihood should have decades remaining to oversee the
bequests and who, most important, has conceived of a purpose
worthy of Bu ett’s billions: ridding the poorest regions of the globe
of disease. As a portfolio manager, Bu ett has always tried to
concentrate on a few stocks—a very few—that he both understood
and felt comfortable with. With his estate, similarly, it is as though
Bu ett sees in the Gates couple, Melinda as well as Bill, a
superstock of philanthropy—a nondiversi ed vehicle through
which his assets will, conceivably, do more to improve human
health, and perhaps even human living standards, than anyone’s
money ever. The man who taught America how to invest is writing
a new chapter on giving it away.

Howard Bu ett and Leila Stahl

COURTESY UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA

The future capitalist with his sister Doris, probably 1931
COURTESY DORIS BUFFETT BRYANT

The Bu etts posed for a photographer in 1942, after Howard’s upset election to Congress.
Warren, then twelve, looked less than thrilled about his forced move to Washington.
OMAHA WORLD-HERALD

Unshakably ethical, Congressman Howard Bu ett refused to keep the salary increase that
Congress awarded to itself. But Warren broke from his father’s ultra-right wing politics.

COURTESY THE JOHN F. SAVAGE PHOTOGRAPHY COLLECTION. OWNED BY WESTERN HERITAGE
MUSEUM , OMAHA

Roberta, Doris, and Warren in Washington. The house in the background is a neighbor’s.
COURTESY DORIS BUFFETT BRYANT

“Likes math … a future stock broker.”

WOODROW WILSON HIGH SCHOOL YEARBOOK , 1947

Though Bu ett was a loner on campus, his witty friend Jerry Orans had him looking all very
rah-rah for the cover of a campus magazine.

COURTESY THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA ARCHIVES

Ben Graham with his third wife, Estelle, in about 1950, the year Bu ett enrolled in Graham’s
investing class. Professor Graham gave Bu ett an A+; Estelle gave Bu ett her money.
COURTESY MARJORIE GRAHAM JANIS

Charlie Munger, the philosopher-king. Bu ett and his partner thought so much alike it was
“spooky.”

COURTESY CHARLIE MUNGER

Susie, sporting a Jacqueline Kennedy hairstyle, had strong objections to Warren’s being “the

absolute last” person in America with a crew cut. In 1962, they posed in the Bu etts’ solarium
at an anniversary party for Susie’s parents.
COURTESY TOM ROGERS

Seabury Stanton’s heart was in textiles. Bu ett’s wasn’t.
COURTESY SPINNER PUBLICATIONS, INC .

The Berkshire Hathaway mill, distinguished by a clock tower, is nestled between three-story

tenements in New Bedford’s South End, a once-thriving commercial district. The water is to the

right.

JOSEPH D. THOMAS

Bu ett arriving at the New Bedford airport for the fateful board meeting at which he took
control of Berkshire

The pigeons in Sevilla, Spain, were drawn to Ben Graham no less than his students back home
were. The picture was taken in 1964.

COURTESY BENJAMIN GRAHAM , JR., M.D., AND JANET LOWE

Warren and Susie in Laguna, California, 1966

COURTESY BENJAMIN GRAHAM , JR., M.D., AND JANET LOWE

His ear to the phone, Bu ett looked like nothing so much as an overeager chipmunk. By age
thirty- ve, he was worth $7 million.
OMAHA WORLD-HERALD

One of the early “annual meetings.” Bu ett hosts a dinner for some of his partners at his home
on Farnam Street, 1969.
COURTESY TOM ROGERS

The charter members of Bu ett’s “Graham Group” were hoping to get advice on the soaring

stock market of 1968, but when Professor Graham showed up at the Hotel Del Coronado, he

gave them a true-false test instead. Left to right: Bu ett, Robert Brustein, Ben Graham, David
“Sandy” Gottesman, Tom Knapp, Charlie Munger, Jack Alexander, Henry Brandt, Walter

Schloss, Marshall Weinberg, Ed Anderson, a half-obscured Buddy Fox, and Bill Ruane. Roy
Tolles took the picture.

COURTESY JACK ALEXANDER

Ben Graham, father of security analysis, about 1970
COURTESY MARJORIE CRAHAM JANIS

The Bu etts strike a characteristic pose: Susie in Warren’s lap. The picture was taken in the
early 1970s.

COURTESY TOM ROGERS

Bu ett in the mid-1970s with his two passions: Susie and a glass of Pepsi
COURTESY TOM ROGERS

Howie, Susie, and Peter with their folks, shortly after Bu ett folded up the partnership. The
co ee cup must have been a prop.
COURTESY PETER BUFFETT

Onstage, the sequined Susie was “all passion and nuance.”
OMAHA WORLD-HERALD

After Bu ett invested $10 million in the Washington Post, he charmed his way onto the board,
befriended the company’s number-shy chairwoman, Kay Graham, and took her to school.
Bu ett’s investment in the company soared to more than $400 million.
BILL DONOVAN

A dashing Bu ett is feted at the Metropolitan Club in New York in 1980. By his ftieth
birthday, Bu ett was worth close to $200 million.
BILL DONOVAN

“Commodore” Munger shows o a spotted grouper in Cape York, Australia. He earned the

sobriquet in Minnesota, when he capsized a shing boat with Bu ett aboard, nearly drowning
him.

IRA MARSHALL

Mrs. B, who quit Bu ett’s store in a rage and set up shop directly opposite, was the only business
partner of Bu ett’s who ever ran out on him. She was ninety- ve at the time.
OMAHA WORLD-HERALD

Bu ett was always smiling when he was with Tom Murphy—the CEO he admired most, and one
who made more than $2.5 billion for him. They are shown at a Capital Cities/ABC retreat in
Phoenix.

COURTESY CAPITAL CITIES/ABC

Warren bought a farm for his son Howie and charged him a market rent.
COURTESY HOWARD GRAHAM BUFFETT

As a youngster, Peter felt his investor-father was in his own solar system. Later, when Peter
achieved success in music, he and Warren learned how to talk with each other.
COURTESY PETER BUFFETT

At American Express, the patrician Jimmy Robinson violated nearly every one of Bu ett’s rules.
Bu ett’s friends were shocked when he invested with Robinson.
COURTESY JAMES D. ROBINSON III

John Gutfreund, the “King” of Wall Street
LARRY BARNS

Bu ett loads up on his favorite cocktail at the Berkshire annual meeting.
LAVERNE D. RAMSEY

Author’s Note/Acknowledgments

I came to the study of Warren Bu ett as a longtime investor in
Berkshire Hathaway, the company that Bu ett controls, and also
as a veteran of a dozen years of nancial reporting at the Wall
Street Journal. Ideally, this book has the bene t of an investor’s
familiarity and a reporter’s objectivity. Whether such noble hopes
have been ful lled may best be judged by the reader.
I began the project in the fall of 1991, when Bu ett was engaged
in the rescue of Salomon Brothers. Bu ett advised me then that he
would not collaborate in any way, but that neither would he
attempt to interfere with the project. Speci cally, he promised not
to either discourage or encourage potential sources. He lived up to
both pledges. However, Bu ett’s voluminous writings, which he has
allowed me to quote, were an invaluable source.
This book is primarily the result of interviews with people who
did agree to cooperate—Bu ett’s family members, his friends, his
associates in business, and others—and I am grateful to every one
of them. With a very few exceptions for those requesting
anonymity, sources are identi ed in the text or in the source notes.
In some cases in which the source seems obvious, I did not include
a note. For instance, the source for most of the unattributed
conversations or incidents involving Bu ett and a second party
was an interview with that other party.
A few sources deserve special mention. There were others, but
Roxanne Brandt, Ken Chace, Bob Goldfarb, Stan Lipsey, Barbara
Morrow, and Charlie Munger responded to my repeated pleas for
help with a spirit of inquiry worthy of the best reporter. Bu ett’s

two sisters, Doris and Roberta, and his three children, Susie,
Howie, and Peter, were at once loyal siblings and o spring and
invaluable and generous guides to the Bu ett family.
In a computerized age, Bruce Levy at the Wall Street Journal and
Jeanne Hauser and Stephen Allard at the Omaha World-Herald
proved that good librarians are as irreplaceable as ever. Also, my
editors at the Wall Street Journal were unusually generous in
granting me an extended leave.
I owe special thanks to my sharp-eyed but gentle readers—Neil
Barsky, Robert Goodman, Andrea Lowenstein, Louis Lowenstein,
and Je rey Tannenbaum. Melanie Jackson, my agent, had the
audacity to believe in this book from the beginning, and I am
grateful for it. Ann Godo , my editor, provided un inching but—
alas—unerring criticism, without which this would have been a far
lesser work. For my young children, Matthew, Zachary, and
Allison, this project has occupied half a lifetime. (I have missed
you, too.) Finally, I must allude to the many gifts I have gotten
from my two parents, among which was the exposure to my
father’s love of nance and unwavering ethics.
—ROGER LOWENSTEIN
January 1995

NOTES

In the notes that follow, names appearing without reference to any
published works, public gatherings, or archival materials indicate
an interview with the author.
“SEC File No. HO-784, Blue Chip Stamps, et al.” refers to a 1974–
76 Securities and Exchange Commission investigation of Blue Chip,
Berkshire Hathaway, and Bu ett. Notes beginning with “SEC File
No. HO-784” followed by a slash “/” indicate materials which,
while unrelated to the case, were collected by the SEC and released
to the author under the Freedom of Information Act.
